12:24 P.M. EST

MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Very calm in here.  Let’s see if we can keep it that way.  (Laughter.)

Josh, no pressure, but you’ll go first.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  I wanted to start with a statement that President Obama and some of the Western leaders released this morning on Syria and the crisis in Aleppo.  And I was wondering if that statement was intended to signal support specifically for this five-day ceasefire that a number of Syrian rebel factions are calling for, or if the leaders were just referring more generally to the crisis and trying to call attention to it.

MR. EARNEST:  Josh, my understanding is they’re not seeking to show support for any one specific plan.  There are a variety of proposals that have been put forward that would reduce the violence sufficiently to allow innocent Syrians in Aleppo to get out of harm’s way, and for the consistent flow of humanitarian aid to commence, particularly to those regions of the country and to those areas of the city that have been under siege for a long time.

So as you’d expect, Josh, these kinds of statements take some time to be negotiated through diplomatic channels, and so this isn't in response to one specific proposal that's been put forward, but rather demonstrating clear, unified international support for some kind of diplomatic arrangement that reduces the violence and allows the flow of humanitarian assistance to commence in a sustained way.

Q    And the statement was very critical, even condemning, of Russia for its role in facilitating the continuation of violence through its actions at the U.N. and elsewhere.  And I'm wondering, given the fact that the U.S. is still talking with Russia about this -- I believe Secretary of State Kerry is meeting Lavrov even today in Germany -- what is the utility of continuing to try to work with Russia on that when we're, in the same breath, saying you guys are the problem, you're the reason that there is not progress on this?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Josh, I think the strategy is essentially to apply pressure to Russia because of the tactics that they have been willing to not just condone but, in some cases, actively support that have resulted in significant innocent loss of life.  And it's continuing.

And the President does not believe it's an effective strategy to gloss over or somehow obscure Russia’s complicity in this sordid affair in order to reach a solution.  In fact, we actually believe that Russia bears special responsibility to help bring about a diplomatic solution because of the way that it intervened on behalf of the Assad regime and because of their own stated significant national interest in the outcome of the situation inside of Syria.

So we're not going to advance a diplomatic solution by somehow acting like Russia has been a good actor when they haven't, or pretending that Russia somehow doesn’t have a stake in the outcome when the truth is they’ve got as big a stake in the outcome as any other country outside of Syria.  So it's time for them to play a responsible role.  And thus far, they haven't. And that's isolated them in the international community.  It's what makes them the object of so much criticism and even scorn from the international community because of their willingness to support actively the depraved tactics of the Assad regime to try to bomb innocent civilians into submission.

Q    Philippine President Duterte has given out a readout of his recent conversation with President-elect Trump and he says that Trump said basically, don't worry about U.S. concerns about your fight against drug criminals; go ahead, you're doing a good job.  How alarming is that to the U.S., given that what we're essentially talking about -- or what you’ve talked about from that podium is the killing of thousands of people without any kind of due process?

MR. EARNEST:  Josh, I have no special knowledge of the telephone conversation between the President-elect and the President of the Philippine, so I can't be in a position to critique the view that's being expressed by the President-elect to the President of the Philippines.

What I can do, however, is restate the position of this administration, the position of the current U.S. government, and that is simply that extrajudicial killings are entirely inconsistent with the notion of the rule of law and a commitment to upholding basic, universal human rights.  It’s plain and simple.

There is a significant challenge facing the government of the Philippines to combat the drug trade in their country.  And it raises significant questions about their economy and about the security situation in the Philippines.  That is a legitimate problem that's worth confronting.  And, in fact, the United States has been supportive of previous efforts by the Philippines to confront the drug trade and try to limit, if not eradicate it.

But President Duterte has certainly raised concerns about the degree to which his government is at least willing to look the other way while these kinds of extrajudicial killings are taking place and while vigilante justice is being meted out.  That's not going to solve the problem.

The President gave a long speech about this yesterday, about how it’s important that our efforts to advance the interests of the United States and provide for the security of the United States is enhanced when we do it consistent with our values.  That same principle applies to other countries, as well.

The other principle that I think is at stake here is a little higher-level principle, but it’s an important one nonetheless.  One of the reasons that it’s important for us to invest in the durability and strength of our alliances is so that we can acknowledge publicly when we disagree.  It’s the sign of a strong relationship that we can acknowledge differences of opinion and encourage our closest friends around the world to live up to the values that our countries and our people prioritize.  It’s a sign of weakness in a relationship if you can't acknowledge differences of opinion.

That's true in interpersonal matters; it’s also true in international diplomacy.  And we don't agree with our allies on every issue.  And preserving the strength of those alliances and investing in the strength of those alliances allows us to, where appropriate, air those differences and not shy away from them.  And in this case, it’s important because the United States draws upon our adherence to these values because it contributes to our influence around the world.  Countries want to be allied with the United States because they recognize what it is that we stand for.  And when we stay true to those values, it only enhances our influence around the globe.  That makes us safer.

And signaling a willingness to backtrack from those values is bad for our individual relationships, but it’s also bad for -- degrades our ability to exert our influence around the world.

Q    And lastly, is the White House amenable to adding a provision in the short-term spending bill to essentially fast-track a waiver for General Mattis, given that the President is going to have to sign this bill to keep the government funded?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, there are a couple of principles at play here, Josh.  The first is that President Obama has long made the argument that while the Senate does have some responsibility to confirm the President’s nominees -- to offer that advice and consent is a fundamental responsibility of the Senate -- at the same time, the President of the United States should be given a lot -- significant latitude to assemble his team.

In many instances, that courtesy was not extended to this President by Republicans in the Senate.  But the President believes that's an important principle.  And again, that is a principle that can be faithfully observed without eroding the constitutional responsibility of the United States Senate to offer their advice and consent.

Second, when it comes to General Mattis, we're talking about somebody that President Obama knows.  General Mattis served as the commander of Central Command for two or three years while President Obama was in office.  He is somebody who served his country with distinction.  He’s a decorated Marine Corps veteran. But President Obama believes that -- well, the standard that we have tried to set is to not comment on, pass judgment on the individuals that the President-elect has put forward to serve in his Cabinet.  And I’m going to try to abide by that principle here.

Q    This isn’t really about General Mattis and his own views on issues or anything.  It’s about the fact that he’s a general, and that in order for him to be confirmed there would have to be a waiver passed by Congress to permit that.  So it’s kind of a different principle.

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, well, I think all these principles come into play, though.  And I certainly wouldn’t want any sort of commentary about this matter to be construed as some sort of implicit criticism of General Mattis -- for a variety of reasons, including he’s somebody who has served this country with distinction under Democratic and Republican Presidents, and he’s supported, based on the public comments I’ve seen, by both Democrats and Republicans that he’s interacted with in the context of his job.

What I will say seems odd is that Senate Republicans feel the need to tuck this provision into a budget bill in order to advance it, instead of having this question of a waiver be considered on its merits.  So the kind of tactics and legislative strategy, to the extent there is one, that has regularly been applied by senators in the Congress is one that I’ve been mystified by in the past, so this is not exactly an unprecedented kind of situation.

But, in general, what I can say is that President Obama believes in the principle of the President being able to assemble a team.  He certainly believes in the principle that somebody like General Mattis is a decorated Marine, has demonstrated his patriotism and service to the country, has served this country with distinction, but ultimately the President-elect and the next Congress are going to have to determine how exactly to advance his nomination to the Senate.

Ayesha.

Q    More on appointments.  Today, President-elect Trump told the “Today Show” that he has consulted President Obama about some of his appointments and that he takes the President’s recommendations very seriously, and also that I guess at least one of the appointments or some of the appointments were highly  -- or were liked by President Obama, according to President-elect Trump.  So I just wondered -- I know that you have declined to kind of talk about what the President thinks of all the appointments, but I guess what type of advice is the President giving to President-elect Trump?  Trump talked about it today.  So what type of advice is he giving him as he appoints his Cabinet?  And also can you speak even about this kind of burgeoning relationship?  I mean, at this point, Trump has repeatedly said that he likes President Obama and he thinks President Obama likes him, too.  So can you talk about this relationship?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  This would probably make for an interesting episode of “Dr. Phil.”  (Laughter.)  Not that I’m giving them any programming ideas -- but they can take that one and run with it.

Look, I know that the President-elect had an opportunity when he was asked in an interview to talk a little bit about his consultations with President Obama.  And he’s the President-elect of the United States, and he’s on the other end of the phone when the President is talking, so he’s got a little more latitude to do that than I do.  I’m going to, from here, in my role, going to protect the ability of the President of the United States to consult in private with the President-elect.

I’ve, on a number of occasions, confirmed that there have been at least a handful of conversations between the President and the President-elect, in addition to the Oval Office meeting that all of you observed, something that took place 36 hours after the votes were tallied on Election Day.  And after that meeting, the President-elect told all of you that it was his expectation the he would consult frequently with the President of the United States because he believed it would be helpful to him. And since that time, we've made clear that President Obama was not just a willing participant in those kinds of conversations but that he would welcome the opportunity to be as helpful as he possibly could to the incoming President.

And that's what he has tried to do.  That's what we have tried to do as an administration in terms of ensuring a smooth and effective transition to the next administration.  But for the content of the conversations that are occurring between the two men, that's not something that I'm going to speak about from here.

Q    So there’s no -- like you couldn't talk about maybe an overarching kind of guidance that he’s trying to give him when it comes to the Cabinet?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I think the way that I would describe it is consultation, and the President is responsive to requests and phone calls from the President-elect.  But beyond that, I just don't have any additional insight that I can share about the nature of the telephone conversations.

Q    Going back to Aleppo, I just want to be clear.  Does the administration have a position on what the rebels should do? Should they withdraw from Aleppo?  I guess Syria and Russia have called for that, said they will not consider a ceasefire until the rebels leave Aleppo.  Does the U.S. have a position on that?

MR. EARNEST:  The U.S. position is that the United Nations is working tirelessly to try to broker the kind of ceasefire in Aleppo that would allow for the significant flow of badly needed humanitarian assistance.  The opposition has agreed to the U.N. plan.  And we believe that the Syrians should, too.  We believe that the Russians should use their influence with the Assad regime to get them to agree to that plan.

But whether it's the U.N. plan or some other diplomatic negotiation that results in a reduction of violence and an increase in humanitarian assistance, that's what we're after.  And the chief obstacle to that goal has been the depraved military tactics of the Assad regime and the complicity of the Russians and Iranians.  And that's the position that we're trying to get them to change.  And it's a position that, thus far, has resulted in widespread bloodshed and a genuine human tragedy inside of Syria.  And the longer that the Syrian government and the Russians and Iranians resist this potential solution, the more conflict and more violence and more bloodshed and more tragedy will occur.

Michelle.

Q    Just to clear up some of these things that have been said on both sides of these phone calls between the President and President-elect -- does the President enjoy these phone calls?

MR. EARNEST:  The President is pleased that he can play a role in ensuring a smooth and effective transition.  And that's something that he has identified as a very high priority, particularly for his last several weeks in office here.  So he’s certainly pleased that he can offer advice and assistance that may be useful to the incoming administration.

Q    And now that President-elect Trump has been pretty detailed in his description and he, just today, as Ayesha was saying, he said that he really does like -- that he loves getting his ideas.  Can it at least be said -- does the President like Donald Trump?  Does he like talking to him as a person?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, for the President’s personal feelings you should just talk to the President about that.  And it's important that -- we'll do another news conference here and maybe somebody will choose to ask.  But I can't speak to their personal relationship.

What I can speak to is the President’s ongoing commitment to coordinating effectively with the President-elect’s team and the President-elect personally to ensure a smooth and effective transition.  And that's included not just in the Oval Office meeting 36 hours after the votes were tallied, but it’s also included additional telephone calls between the two men and a variety of meetings at a variety of levels at agencies all across the federal government to give the incoming administration the best opportunity to get off to a running start.

Q    Since the last time we asked you about these phone calls -- and you mentioned that there had been a handful -- have there been any more between then and now?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't remember exactly the last time that I was asked, so I can't confirm any additional calls at this point.

Q    One thing you have spoken to a number of times both before and after the election are what you call the deep concerns that the President has going forward with this new administration.  So is it safe to say that the President still has concerns about some of the picks that Trump has made?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don't have a -- we're not going to take a position on individual nominees that are put forward by the President-elect.  I think what those deep concerns often referred to were some of the rhetoric and policy positions that were advocated by Mr. Trump when he was running for President.  But elections have consequences.  And while those concerns have not gone away, the election is over, and the institutional responsibility of the President and everybody who works for him is to focus on putting our political differences and our political opinions aside and fulfilling the duties that the American people have entrusted us with, which is to serve the public and to give the choice of the American voters the opportunity to succeed in the years ahead.

Q    So the numerous concerns that both the President and you listed haven't been assuaged at all by anything you’ve seen since the election?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, I think it's too early to judge.  And people all across the country will have the opportunity to do exactly that.  And, look, President-elect Trump ran for office advocating a much different approach to running the country than the one that President Obama has pursued over the last eight years.  He said he wanted to do things differently and he found a variety of very colorful ways to make that quite clear to everybody who was walking into the voting booth.  And the outcome of the election is such that Secretary Clinton got 2.5 million more votes, but President-elect Trump won the election.  He won the Electoral College.  He will be the next President of the United States.  And the American people will have an opportunity to see whether or not the different kind of approach that he’s advocating actually yields better results.

So we certainly want people to understand exactly what kind of progress this country was able to make under the leadership of President Obama, to persuade them of the wisdom of that approach so that they’ll be able to evaluate it against the kind of changed approach that President-elect Trump is vowing to pursue.

Q    Over the last couple of days we’ve heard some pretty heavy criticism of certain of Donald Trump’s picks.  And I know you don't want to get into individual assessments or anything, and I'm not asking for that.  But when you talk about concerns that are still there, do those include the people that he’s choosing to be around him?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don't want to signal a position one way or the other on some of --on any of the President-elect’s personnel decisions.  I think the obvious thing that I would be willing to say is that President-elect Trump is choosing people with different views and different styles than the kinds of people that President Obama chose.

And the American people were very well served by the service of people like Secretary Burwell, who has effectively implemented the Affordable Care Act; or Secretary McDonald, who has implemented a series of reforms and reduced the backlog at the VA, and expanded and improved the delivery of benefits being provided to our veterans; or there are people like Secretary Carter, who has undertaken significant efforts to strengthen our military and making sure that we're making smart planning decisions so that the future of the U.S. military is effectively adapted to the challenges that we may face moving forward.

So, look, I could cite examples all across the administration, not just at the Cabinet level, but also at the White House.  The kinds of people that President-elect Trump has chosen appear to have, in many cases, different priorities, different styles and, in some cases, starkly different bank accounts.  (Laughter.)  But the President-elect should benefit from the latitude -- significant latitude to choose his team.

Q    -- a little contrast there?

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, I think I am.  (Laughter.)  I do think that over -- look, at the end of eight years, we will have a variety of benchmarks and metrics to evaluate how the United States of America benefitted from the priorities, agenda, and leadership style of President Obama.  And there will be a very clear opportunity for all of you, in particular, to evaluate whether or not the kinds of changes that President-elect Trump puts in place benefit the country.  And that's an open question, but it’s an experiment that the American people in all their wisdom have chosen to conduct.

Q    Are you saying their bank account affects someone’s capability?

MR. EARNEST:  Not at all.  I think it -- I don't think it would actually have much of an impact at all on anybody’s ability to serve the country.

Q    Why did you say it then?

MR. EARNEST:  Mostly to be funny.  (Laughter.)  And it got a couple of chuckles.

Q    Thanks for spelling that out.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  I guess that goes to that old adage, though, if you have to explain the joke, it wasn’t that funny.  (Laughter.)  So maybe it wasn’t.

Cheryl.

Q    Okay, the CR.

MR. EARNEST:  Yes.

Q    Yes, it came out last night -- April 28th, a lot of riders, but a lot of funding.  Will the President sign it?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I can tell you that the President and his team were up late last night -- I don't know if the President was up late last night reviewing the bill, but the President’s team, the experts at the OMB and other agencies that are trying to understand the consequences of some of the proposals that are included in the CR have been carefully analyzing that.

     I’m not ready to render a judgment one way or the other on the proposal.  But I can tell you that we continue to review the legislation and are looking at the finer points to make sure we understand exactly what impact the passage of the bill would have on funding the U.S. government.

Q    Do you believe that we can avoid a government shutdown in two days?  Is there enough time to pass this CR?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’m certainly no expert on legislative procedure and as I’ve observed on many other occasions, even simple things have posed a significant challenge to this Republican-led Congress, so I’m not making any predictions.  I certainly hope we’ll be able to avoid a government shutdown.  I can't envision a scenario in which the U.S. economy or the American people somehow benefit from a government shutdown.  So hopefully that's something we’ll be able to avoid.

What it will require is something that it’s required the last couple of years, which is compromise.  And that is another thing that Republicans in Congress have not demonstrated much of an ability to do.  But it will be required in this instance.  It’s going to require bipartisan compromise for this bill to pass both houses of Congress and be signed into law by a Democratic President.  The President is willing to compromise.  He doesn't expect that every element of the CR should be something that he wholeheartedly supports.  He recognizes that this will be a compromise.  But we're taking a look at the bill to understand exactly what sort of compromise will be required, and we’ll let you know as soon as we can about the final conclusion that's been reached.

Q    Do you expect to have a judgment today on that?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't know how much progress they've been able to make on it today, but we’ll keep you posted.

Ron.

Q    Anything on the General Flynn-Ambassador Rice meeting?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't have anything on that.  I know that there have been some reports about Ambassador Rice meeting with the individual that the President-elect designated to succeed her in the fancy corner office in the West Wing.

What I can tell you is that, more generally, the National Security Council, under the leadership of Dr. Rice, has spent months preparing materials, assembling briefing books, compiling information to ensure a smooth and effective transition into the next administration.  So I’m not in a position to confirm any individual meetings that have taken place, but I can tell you that there have been a variety of meetings that have already occurred that are focused on achieving that goal.

And when we're talking about the National Security Council, we're talking about the organization that is responsible for managing a range of very sensitive issues.  So a lot of close coordination and consultation will be required to ensure a smooth handoff here.  And we're certainly committed -- and I know that Dr. Rice is personally committed -- to ensuring that we're going to do everything that's required to make that happen.

Q    The statement on Syria by the six nations, how was that initiated?  Was that something that the President initiated?  Or who?  I’m not sure, you may have answered that.  But I --

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, I’m not aware that there was any individual presidential-level conversation about this.  But obviously the President has had a number of conversations with some of the world leaders who signed on to this statement about the situation in Syria.

Q    I ask because you've always emphasized how the President is trying to use every diplomatic means available to him to effect a more positive situation there.  So this doesn't fall into that category?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, no -- look, the President has worked assiduously to mobilize the international community to respond to the situation inside of Syria, and there were a number of conversations that President Obama has had with the leaders of these countries who signed on to the statement in a variety of settings.  And this has been a long-running effort.

And, look, I think this is a good example of how U.S. leadership is important in the international community and is effective in advancing our interests.  It doesn't benefit the United States of America for there to be continued chaos inside of Syria.  And President Obama continues to rally the international community both through our counter-ISIL coalition, but also through diplomacy like this to try to find the kind of diplomatic solution that will bring an end to the violence inside of Syria that will expedite the provision of humanitarian assistance, but also make the world safer for the American people.

Q    In an interview -- in a tease about an interview that the President did on CNN -- I believe it was about ISIS -- he said something to the effect that ISIS’s ability to launch a major land offensive “was not on my radar.”  Have you heard that?

MR. EARNEST:  I think this may be the CNN documentary that's running later today.

Q    So the statement, again, ISIS’s ability to launch a major land offensive was not on my radar -- does that suggest a huge failure on the part of the administration to see this threat coming?

MR. EARNEST:  Maybe you're making a reference to an event that's not coming to mind here.  What are you referring to here?

Q    The President’s statement in this interview where he said, ISIS’s ability to launch a major land offensive was not on my radar.

MR. EARNEST:  So you're talking about in Iraq in 2014?

Q    Exactly.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.  I thought this was a reference to the President’s speech yesterday.  But now I see what you're trying to talk about.

Look, I think this may be a situation where let’s take a look at the President’s -- the entire context of the President’s remarks.  I think we've talked a lot about how the Iraqi security forces did not perform at a level that we expected them to, even in the face of this threat from ISIL.  And that's something that I know that I’ve talked about from here, and something the President has talked about before.  But we’ll take a closer look at the President’s comments when they air in full tonight.

Q    He seemed to suggest an intelligence failure -- or admit one -- on the part of the United States -- not necessarily a failure by the Iraqis, a failure on the American side to see this coming.

Lastly, what does the President think of Joe Biden in 2020?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t asked him about it.  I think that as the Vice President was answering the question, I think that he -- well, I didn't talk to the Vice President about it either, so --

Q    You couldn't think of anything funny to say?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  Well, not for the first time in my life and certainly not for the first time in the context of this job.

I’ll let the Vice President’s comment stand.  And if he chooses to further clarify them, then he’ll do that himself, or I’ll have a conversation with him and see if I can bring some greater clarity.

Margaret, nice to see you.

Q    Nice to see you.  The President, yesterday in his remarks, talked about Guantanamo -- hundreds of millions’ expense to keep 59 guys there, a blot on our national conscience.  But he stopped short of saying that he’s actually going to shut the place down before he leaves.  Was this a final sort of coming to terms with the fact that the prison is going to stay open after he leaves office?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, we have been deeply dismayed at the obstacles that Congress has erected to prevent progress on this significant national security priority.  Democratic and Republican national security experts strongly support the President’s position that closing the prison at Guantanamo Bay would save taxpayer dollars and make the country safer.  A variety of military leaders have reached that conclusion.  Even President George W. Bush, who has different views on foreign policy than President Obama in most areas, but in this area, he agrees that the prison should be closed.

So there’s strong bipartisan agreement among those who have dedicated their lives to protecting the country that the prison at Guantanamo Bay should be closed, and the American people would benefit from it.

But this is a political situation that members of Congress in both parties, to be fair, have allowed to persist that prevents this kind of common-sense policy from being implemented. That's been deeply disappointing to the President.  And we're going to continue to do everything we can between now and the President’s departure to reduce the prison population at Gitmo.

And there’s a strategy that we have initiated that includes the individual review of these prisoners to determine the wisdom of transferring them overseas.  And when this interagency panel determines that an individual, under the right restrictions, can be safely transferred to another country, we're doing the important diplomatic work of finding another country who will take them.

And since President Obama has been in office, there are about 175 Gitmo detainees that have been transferred under these conditions.  And that's been good for the country.  But Congress has repeatedly thrown up obstacles that prevent the successful closing of the prison.

Q    That wasn’t admitting defeat?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President has been deeply disappointed by how Congress has refused to fulfill their basic responsibility to save taxpayer dollars, or at least spend their money judiciously, and enhance the national security of the United States.  On both metrics, with regard to this policy, Congress has fallen down on the job.  And that's been a source of significant frustration that we've expressed from time to time over the last eight years.

Q    You talked about some of the national security officials who support closure.  One of them who clearly did not is the man who looks to be the new Department of Homeland Security chief, General Kelly, who has argued that Guantanamo is not only operated well, but that it has a place in our national security framework, and prisoners should be there.  So is the President disappointed to see that the President-elect is putting someone into this position who is on record saying no one is innocent at Gitmo and that it should stay open?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, I want to be real clear about our position about the need to close the prison at Guantanamo Bay should not be viewed by anybody as an attempt to impugn or criticize the service of our men and women in uniform who are operating that prison.  That's difficult work.  And so I don't want this policy position to be portrayed by somebody as a criticism of our men and women in uniform.

With respect to General Kelly’s comments, I’m going to reserve comment on anybody that President-elect Trump has put forward for a senior Cabinet-level position.  Obviously, as I alluded to earlier, many of them have positions that are different than positions that this administration has prioritized.  And that's not particularly surprising given the outcome of the election.  But I don't have a specific reaction to General Kelly’s stated position on this issue.

Q    A question on Syria, to come back to it?

MR. EARNEST:  Sure.

Q    In the language of the statement you released this morning, you seem to be suggesting something like sanctions.  You said “restrictive measures on entities and individuals are being considered”.  You've got sanctions on Russia, sanctions on Iran, sanctions on the Assad regime.  These are all punitive.  They are clearly not prohibitive.  They've done absolutely nothing to stop the violence in Aleppo or in Syria.  So is this kind of rhetoric the extent of the action the United States and the world powers are going to take right now?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the extent of the action that we are taking is, first and foremost, military action against ISIL terrorists and other extremists inside of Syria that are trying to capitalize on the chaos to plot and execute attacks against the United States and the West.  And so --

Q    Well, the statement was about that 200,000 civilians and children are being denied medicine and food.  That's what you're statement was about.

MR. EARNEST:  That was what the statement was about.  But people should not be confused about the totality of U.S. action to protect the American people and advance our interests around the world, including in Syria.  And our actions in Syria have taken ISIL leaders off the battlefield.  They've taken other extremists off the battlefield, including extremists who are plotting and planning to carry out attacks against the United States and our allies in the West.

And so there is a lot of focus on the situation in Aleppo, and there should be.  In fact, there probably should be more.  But we should not allow the tragedy in Aleppo to obscure the important work that's being done by the United States military and our 67 coalition partners to take the fight to ISIL, to increase pressure on extremists, and to enhance the national security of the United States.

With regard to Aleppo, our efforts don't just include negotiations among Canada, France, Germany, Italy, and the U.K.  They also include supporting a U.N.-led effort to try to facilitate a diplomatic agreement.  And they also include extensive repeated discussions with the Russians to try to bring them to the negotiating table so that they use their influence with the Assad regime to get us closer to an agreement.  But the Russians have been resistant to doing that.  And that's what’s allowed this tragedy to continue.

But ultimately, the United States is playing a leading role in the international community -- to organize the international community to apply pressure to Russia, Iran and Syria to bring them to the negotiating table.  They’re going to have to be a part of any negotiated solution.  And that's what we're trying to bring about.

Q    Respectfully, the international community efforts -- five or six U.N. resolutions have been killed so far, all the diplomatic talks have failed.  So that's why the question --

MR. EARNEST:  The reason why we're still working on it is because we haven't gotten the results we’d like to see yet.

Q    But it's just rhetoric, it's just words at this point. And there’s an immediate crisis.  I mean, Kerry is talking to Lavrov today.  He’s going to Paris this weekend.  But in the meantime, there are people very much in crisis, which is what your statement is about.  So is the statement the extent of immediate action?

MR. EARNEST:  No.  There’s a meeting with Russia that Secretary Kerry is planning later this week.  There are continued efforts at the U.N. to apply diplomatic pressure to the situation.  There are continued talks that are being led by the U.N. to try to facilitate a diplomatic agreement.

If there were an obvious or simple military solution, it's certainly possible that the United States and our allies, or at least our partners in the counter-ISIL coalition, would have considered it by now.  But we have said from the beginning, from day one, that the ultimate solution here is a diplomatic one.  And diplomacy is hard.  And Russia, in particular, has been resistant to engaging constructively in pursuit of that negotiated solution.

And we've been profoundly disappointed by that, and lives have been lost as a result of that.  There’s no denying that.  But it's certainly not for any sort of lack of effort or lack of action on the part of the United States.  And we continue to mobilize and lead the international community both to look after the national security interests of the United States but also to try to bring this human tragedy to an end.

Q    What are the restrictive measures that you're talking about in the statement?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, there are a variety of things that have been considered, including the kinds of financial penalties that the United States has been able to apply in coordination with our allies in a variety of situations.  And I certainly wouldn't rule out something like that in the future, but I would also acknowledge that we haven't seen those sorts of sanctions bring about the entirety of the change in strategy that we’d like to see.

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Is the President aware of the declared mistrial in the case of the South Carolina officer that killed Walter Scott?  What’s his reaction to that?

MR. EARNEST:  He is aware of that, Kevin, and the reason I can't offer you a reaction is that the police officer in question is facing civil rights charges that were brought by the Department of Justice.  So there is an ongoing legal proceeding, and I wouldn't want to say something or comment on this situation in a way that could have an impact on that legal proceeding.

So the Department of Justice is going to continue to do their work, and that is work that they have done independent of any sort of direction or opinion that has been shared by the President of the United States.

Q    Any idea if the President might accelerate the number of commutations between now and the end of his administration?  The New York Times had a fairly interesting piece, in one part lauding him for doing something on criminal justice reform that he was not able to do broadly, and yet they also point out that there are thousands, perhaps even tens of thousands of people that might be candidates for that sort of special consideration.

MR. EARNEST:  Kevin, when the President was asked about this question back in August at the Pentagon, he made clear that there is a process that the Department of Justice is administering to consider individually the applications for clemency that have been submitted, and the President does not envision circumventing that process.

His expectation, and what we have tried to do particularly over the last year or 18 months, has been to turbocharge that process, to offer more resources to that process, so that it can function more efficiently, and to consider more applications.  But I do not envision a scenario in which that process is somehow shortened or that we cut corners in that process so that more individuals can benefit from this clemency.  The President believes that rigor being applied to that process benefits the American people and benefits those who are given this special opportunity for a second chance.

Q    I know I've asked you previously about the President’s comments about Pearl Harbor Day, and I know that there’s something scheduled for later in the month.  I'm just curious, how is he spending this particular Pearl Harbor Day?  Is he reaching out to any veterans or doing anything in particular today?

MR. EARNEST:  I'm not aware of any specific actions on the part of the President, but obviously he had an opportunity on Veterans Day, less than a month ago, to travel to Arlington National Cemetery to lay a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknowns, and to restate once again the profound debt that we owe to military veterans of all generations, including the Greatest Generation.  And this was a generation that was summoned to action based on the tragic attack perpetrated by the Japanese 75 years ago today.  And I think all of us, including the President, have thoughts of deep gratitude for the sacrifice and service of the Greatest Generation of Americans.

And the President himself has talked quite a bit about his grandfather who served, I believe it was in the United States Army, in World War II in the European theater.  And that's his own personal connection to that generation.  And I think all of us, to one extent or another, even though many of them are no longer living, have our own connection to those who served and to those who fought and even those who died in ensuring that tyranny was defeated in World War II.

Q    Last thing, I wanted to ask you about welfare reform.  House Republicans are said to be considering laying the groundwork for a fresh effort to overhaul the food stamp program and coming up with different work and eligibility requirements.  And I ask you that in part because I remember previously this month you talked about the steep decline in the rate of poverty growth in America.  And so I'm wondering if the White House feels like now is a good time for a fresh look at SNAP.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I haven't seen the individual proposals that have been put forward by Republicans, so I don't know if I can comment on those specifically.  But obviously, there was a government report earlier this year that indicated that poverty in 2015 fell faster in that year than in any year since the 1960s.  I think it might be one indication that the anti-poverty economic strategy that President Obama has pursued worked pretty well.

And that is true when you consider how significantly poverty has been reduced over the last year.  It's also true when you consider how significantly wages for working people have gone up -- the highest on record that same report showed.  And wage growth was actually higher for lower- and middle-income families than it was for those at the top.  So it's not just that we're reducing poverty; we're actually making some progress in reducing inequality as well.

I think it's a pretty good indication that the kind of strategy that we've implemented has worked.  And if Republicans want to implement a new strategy, we'll see what impact it has.  This sort of goes back to what I was saying to Michelle.  If Republicans want to try a different approach, we'll have an opportunity to see if it works.  We'll have an opportunity to see

-- if by making some of these changes Republicans can further reduce the poverty rate beyond the historic success that we’ve had in reducing the poverty rate, we'll have an opportunity to tell.

I'm skeptical that they’ll succeed in doing that, but the American people have given them the opportunity to try.

Q    By the measure of success you're saying that it's gone better under the President’s program and the poverty rate is not rising at a faster rate -- certainly slower rate than it has in half a century.  And I just wanted to throw a couple numbers at you.  SNAP apparently serves about 44 million people at the cost of $74 billion.  Those are 2015 numbers, but that's up significantly since 2008.  So I'm just curious if it's going better -- based on your own assessment -- is it now a good time to maybe take a fresh look at programs like these?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President actually in his -- back in January, the President delivered his State of the Union address to a joint session of Congress, and one area that he identified in that speech was an opportunity to work in bipartisan fashion with Democrats and Republicans on a proposal that Speaker Ryan himself had long advocated, and that was essentially the expansion of tax cuts for low-income workers that don't have kids.

Unfortunately, the Speaker of the House didn’t take him up on that opportunity for cooperation.  So I'm not suggesting that somehow there aren't further improvements that could be made.  In fact, President Obama has offered his support for some of the ideas that Republicans have put forward to do that.  I don't think that SNAP falls in that category, but I can't speak at length about the proposal just because I haven't seen it.

But there certainly are areas where President Obama would -- has already indicated his strong support for some of these proposals that he believes would have a beneficial impact on the economy and would further reduce inequality in this country.

April.

Q    Josh, I want to ask a couple of questions.  First -- and I want to go back to the Trump thing and the phone calls -- how many times has President Obama spoken by phone with President-elect Donald Trump?

MR. EARNEST:  We played this game a couple times over the last couple of weeks --

Q    It’s not a game, I’m asking a real question, though.

MR. EARNEST:  I didn’t say it wasn’t a real question.  What I’m telling you is I’m not going to get into the details of reading out individual phone calls.  So they’ve spoken several times since their face-to-face Oval Office meeting just after the election, but I don’t have a specific number to give you.

Q    Okay, well, it’s more than twice.  We know that.  Maybe three or four now?

Q    I think he said “a handful” last time.

MR. EARNEST:  So I did say “a handful” last time.  I’m saying “several” this time.

Q    Two handfuls?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  I’m being intentionally ambiguous.

Q    We know it’s at least two times.  Maybe three, four?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  April, I would suggest that maybe we pursue a more fruitful line of questioning, respectfully.

Q    Respectfully.  All right, well, now, on Donald Trump and his comments this morning about how President Obama is a likable sort -- if, indeed, these two would have talked, do you believe -- earlier -- that some of this division, some of these, the thought process and some of the words may not have been used to cause the divide that continues right now in this nation?  Do you believe if they had talked prior to the elections that we would not be seeing the efforts to come together because of the comments that were made?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, it’s difficult to answer counterfactuals because nobody really knows.  I think the one thing we do know is that Republicans laid out a very clear strategy on the day that President Obama was inaugurated the very first time, which is to block and obstruct every single thing that he tried to do and to, as much as they could, to try to delegitimize his presidency.

That was the strategy that was pursued by Republicans, and they did not succeed in limiting President Obama to one term.  In fact, President Obama was not just elected once, but twice, with a strong majority of the American electorate.  And that gave him a mandate to go and pursue an agenda that has benefited the American people.  And that’s everything from strengthening our economy, preventing a second Great Depression, rescuing the American auto industry, to reforming our health care system in a way that ensures every American has access to quality, affordable health insurance and can’t be discriminated against because they have a preexisting condition.

It also gave him a mandate to go and advance our interests around the world, to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon by working through diplomacy and not firing a single shot, but actually confronting what most people, including some of our closest allies, had identified as the greatest national security threat that the world was facing.

I could obviously go on at some length, and I’ll stop.  But the fact is President Obama has repeatedly sought to work with Republicans, but that ran counter to the political strategy that Republicans laid out to try to block him at every turn and to refuse to cooperate with him even on things they supported.  And the country did not benefit from that.  But this was a political strategy that has yielded some political benefits for Republicans.  And a lot of that is what led to the election of Mr. Trump.  But that will be something for historians and others to carefully consider.

What I think the President’s hope is that what all of you consider as you report on the next administration is to evaluate what impact their changes are having, particularly when you consider the strong trajectory that the country currently enjoys.

Q    On your thoughts about Rahm Emanuel in Trump Tower?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, there are a number of Democrats that have accepted an invitation from the President-elect to meet with him, and it certainly makes sense that the mayor of the third-largest city in the country might want to have a conversation with the President of the United States.

Q    And lastly, going back to what Kevin said about -- more so about the area and what happened -- Charleston, North Charleston area.  It was in the news last year.  It caused a lot of change in the mind and in the heart and on so many levels -- President Obama, weeks after what happened to Walter Scott, President Obama was there.  He preached a sermon for the nine that died in Mother Emanuel church.  And now Dylann Roof is -- the jury has been seated in this trial.  What does the President say, looking back a year to today, after what happened?  And I understand that you can’t say much on the issue that is going to the federal piece.  But what does he say about the area and how it made a mark in this nation from that time to today?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I can’t talk about the individual cases for the reasons that you cited, but I think both of these cases, just gauging by the news media interest, have captured the attention of people all across the country.  And I think all of this debate and examination can sometimes be painful, but ultimately that’s the kind of examination and debate that will be required to move the country forward.

And the President gave a powerful speech -- a sermon at a memorial service in Charleston about 18 months ago, and that certainly captured the attention of the American people as well. And to the extent that the President was able to contribute to a healthy examination of some of these issues and a healthy debate and discussion and dialogue in this country, he’s pleased with that.

One example, one manifestation of that is the way that a lot of people reconsidered their view of the confederate flag in light of these issues, in terms of what it symbolizes.  That was a healthy thing for that country.

But this is going to be part of process.  And there’s not just going to be one event, or one landmark jury decision, or one heart-wrenching tragedy that’s going to solve all these problems. This is going to be a process.  And it’s going to be a process that the President hopes the country can pursue together -- that the more that we can remember that the differences that unite are more powerful and more influential and more numerous than the things that divide us, that will certainly benefit us as we make our way down this path.

Q    And the last question.  You say it’s going to be a process, and as we go through this transition, I’m thinking about that process that you said and what the President said in that sermon that he delivered for Reverend Pinckney.  He talked about “amazing grace,” and he kept talking about grace.  Is it about grace, or is it more so about heart, or is it about legislation as we deal with the newness of life for the next couple of months?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, I think more grace in our public discourse in every area, not just when it comes to national politics, I think is something that the entire country and all of our citizens would benefit from.

Kenneth.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Going back to Rahm Emanuel at Trump Tower today, we know that he urged the President-elect not to deport DREAMers -- of course, hundreds of young people -- or people who were brought here as children who were covered under the President’s DACA program.  Even in the past hour, there have been some Republicans and Democrats on Capitol Hill who said they were encouraged by the President-elect’s remarks, and people -- I think he said that we have to look at this and take a look at something that will work and that the American people would be proud, according to his words.  So is the White House -- this White House -- encouraged by those words as well?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, the President has been crystal-clear, both in words and in deeds, about his view that young people who are American in every way but their papers shouldn’t be deported, shouldn’t be ripped away from family members, when the truth is that they came to the United States through no fault of their own.

A policy of deporting them would be inconsistent with our values and one that would be a setback for the country, particularly when you consider the remarkable contribution that many of those young people have already made to our country, whether it’s by starting a business, or signing up to serve in our military, or otherwise living as upstanding members of communities all across the country.

So I can’t speak to what policy the next administration intends to pursue.  I think the perspective and values that I’ve just given voice to are the kinds of values that enjoy strong bipartisan support not just in Washington and not just in Congress but all across the country.  And hopefully Democrats and Republicans will be able to find a way to deal with this situation in a way that’s consistent with our values, in a way that’s consistent with our laws.  And if they do, the country stands to benefit not just from a national security perspective, not just from a quality of life perspective, but also from an economic perspective as well.

Q   I'm sure you would agree, there are a number of people -- undocumented immigrants and people who are covered under the President’s executive actions who want to know what is this White House doing?  You say you don’t know what the next one is going to do, but we want to know what is this White House doing to have an impact and maybe even change some minds or policies from the incoming President?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the thing that we certainly have done is we have taken quite seriously the transition process to ensure that the incoming administration understands

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the thing that we certainly have done is we have taken quite seriously the transition process to ensure that the incoming administration understands what policies we've pursued and why we've pursued them, and what impact it has had across the country.  But ultimately, the next President will take office on January 20th.  And his policies that will be implemented.

Q    Finally, can you confirm a report that the First Lady held a good-bye party for White House staff and brought everyone to tears at a local pizza restaurant?  I know there’s a lot of good-byes happening over the next few weeks, or 44 days left.  Can you confirm that?  And were staff -- were they moved to tears?  Were you one of them?

MR. EARNEST:  I was on the President’s trip to Florida yesterday, so I did not participate in an event like that.  But let me see if I can get you some more information about it, okay?

Toluse.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  Is it still the position of this administration that Assad must go?  I know the President said that a few years ago.  But does that stand?

MR. EARNEST:  That continues to be the policy of the administration.  And again, it’s not just because he stands in the way of a solution -- a diplomatic solution, although he does. And it’s not just that we are so offended morally by his willingness to use the military might of his country against innocent civilians.  There’s also a practical consideration, which is that he has waged war on a substantial number of citizens in his country; his country has been torn apart; he has made it clear that he is unable to lead that country.  And in order for us to find the kind of political solution that will bring that violence and chaos to an end, he can't continue to serve as President of that country.  And that's been our policy for years.  And it continues to be our policy today.

Q    In the statement today, the five or six countries said that there must not be impunity for those responsible.  Is that statement specific to Assad?  And do you believe that he should face war crime challenges for what he’s done?

MR. EARNEST:  That statement is an indication that there must be accountability, particularly with regard to the kinds of depraved tactics that have been used by the regime against innocent civilians.  Accountability in these situations is necessary and consistent with our values as a country.

Q    Let me ask you about the Cabinet that's being formed -- not specifically about specific picks, but the fact that there seem to be a large number of generals who have been chosen or who are being interviewed -- the Department of Defense, NSA, now the Department of Homeland Security, and potentially the State Department.  Does the White House have any thoughts about the fact that Donald Trump seems to be potentially choosing a Cabinet that's very heavy on retired military?

MR. EARNEST:  No, just because I don't want to be in a position of criticizing or being -- even appearing to criticize decisions being made by the President-elect.

What I’ll say is that the President spoke as recently as yesterday about the values and leadership qualities that are exhibited by the men and women of the United States military.  And many of the people that President-elect Trump has put forward are people that have served this country in the military with distinction.  And that is -- even where political differences exist, that service and that commitment to sacrificing for the country are worthy of respect.  The President certainly has exhibited that respect.  I certainly tried to exhibit that respect.

But ultimately, what qualifications and criteria the President-elect wants to use in choosing his Cabinet is something that I’ll let him decide.

Q    Secretary Hillary Clinton is going to be on Capitol Hill for the unveiling of Harry Reid’s portrait tomorrow.  Is there any chance that President Obama will meet her, speak to her tomorrow?

MR. EARNEST:   I’m not aware that they’ll meet, but we’ll keep you posted.  I don't think I can commit at this point to announcing that meeting if it does occur.  But let me see if I can get you guidance.

Q    Thanks, Josh.

MR. EARNEST:  John.

Q    Thanks a lot, Josh.  Since the presidential election four weeks ago, the President has nominated numerous individuals to government boards such as the Surface Transportation Board, Legal Services Corporation, the Kennedy Center Board.  Is it the President’s expectation that the lame duck Senate will take up these nomination up or down?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, John, I actually don't know to what extent the individuals that you have named actually require Senate confirmation.  But we can certainly have somebody take a look at that for you.

Q    Is there an agreement with the Senate Majority Leader that the lame duck Senate will take up various nominations that require Senate confirmation?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't know what sort of agreements, if any, have been reached with Senate Republicans.

JC.

Q    We had discussed the benefits of, in a sense, living above the store for the President, the immediacy to a crisis situation where he can meet in the Situation Room with his Joint Chiefs, his security team, members of Congress, et cetera.  And the fact that Donald Trump has been choosing to stay -- at least for now -- at Trump Tower, and possibly maybe the first bi-city President, so to speak -- what in a sense -- now that we have a price tag, it’s literally costing the American taxpayer and the New York City taxpayer in excess of $3 million a day to keep Mr. Trump safe in the tower.  Do you have any additional thoughts about that?  I know you made a comment about wherever the President goes, his security team is close by.

MR. EARNEST:  That's right.  Look, over the years I have been in a variety of situations, in a variety of settings where I have fielded questions about criticism from Republicans with regard to the President’s travel, and I’m not going to give into the temptation to do the same thing to the President-elect.

Mark Knoller, you had your hand up earlier.  I’ll give you the last one if you still have a question.

Q    You bet I do.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.

Q    I wanted to ask you to clarify your answer earlier about the waiver for the Defense Secretary.  Were you saying the President would not sign a waiver if it reached his desk, that he’d prefer it happen during the new administration?

MR. EARNEST:  No, I think what I’m saying is the short answer to your question is, no, I was not signaling an unwillingness on the part of the President to sign a bill containing such a waiver.  I think the observation that I was making is that it seems odd that congressional Republicans would be choosing to sneak a provision in a budget bill to expedite the confirmation of somebody who is a decorated Marine Corps officer, somebody who has served Presidents in both parties, somebody who Democrats and Republicans have spoken warmly of.  So I can't really explain it.

I’m not indicating that the administration will refuse to cooperate with them.  In fact, the principle that I was giving voice to earlier was the idea that Presidents should be given some latitude to choose the people that they want to have on their team.  The President was not extended that courtesy consistently by Republicans in the Senate, but it’s a principle that the President believes in not just since he’s coming in the door, but on his way out the door.  And it’s one that we’ll -- that he believes in.

So, hopefully -- did that clarify --

Q    You're saying a standalone bill on the waiver is the way to go?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess I find it strange that Republicans in Congress seem to be taking an unconventional step to avoid the straightforward consideration of this waiver purely on its merits and on the merits of General Mattis’s service to the country.  So I think it’s a question that I’m raising that I think is worth asking.  But it’s one that only congressional Republicans can answer.

Q    And I wanted to ask about what the President said yesterday, that it was the last time he was going to hear “Hail to the Chief” on the road.  What does that tell us about travel between now and January 20th?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think it’s an indication that the President’s travel between now and January 20th is likely to be limited, at least with respect to official events.  The President does still intend to travel to Hawaii to spend time with his family there over the holidays.

All right?  Thanks, everybody.  We’ll see you tomorrow.

END
1:37 P.M. EST
MR. EARNEST:  Happy Friday, everybody.  Nice to see you all.  Before we get started, as you might judge from the monitors behind, we got a couple things we want to do at the top before we get started.

As all of you saw this morning, today the final monthly jobs report of the Obama administration was released, and I want to go over a couple of the highlights here.

Like many of you, I've spent the first Friday morning of each month of the last eight years anticipating the monthly jobs data.  At the beginning of the administration, the earliest days of this presidency, the day that was in the minds of many people down right terrifying, our economy was losing hundreds of thousands of jobs a month and the unemployment rate was climbing sharply.  Eight years later, driven by the policies this administration put in place and the resilience of the American workforce, the data looks quite different and the numbers tell a very different story about the health of our economy.

In December, the U.S. economy added a 156,000 jobs, extending the longest streak of total job growth in our nation's history.  U.S. businesses have now added 15.8 million jobs over the course of the economic recovery.  Wages are continuing to rise, and the unemployment rate continues to be less than half of what it was during the peak of the recession.

Over the eight years that President Obama has been in office, you all have held us to an extraordinarily high standard when it comes to the economic recovery, and we're proud of the progress that America has made.  This progress shows that policy matters.  Without the policies the President fought for, it would not have been possible.  And so I recount the facts today, because acknowledging how far we have come as a country is an important part of understanding what's needed to create an economy that provides good job opportunities and generates higher wages for all Americans who are willing to work for them.

The President-elect, of course, has promised a different approach.  His approach includes rolling back regulations that have protected middle-class families from having to foot the bill for Wall Street's risky behavior.  His approach includes leveling high tariffs on foreign goods that drive up costs for consumers in the United States and put at risk higher-paying U.S. jobs that are tied to exports.  And, of course, he's also vowed to repeal the Affordable Care Act which would add trillions to the deficit.

As you evaluate the impact of the President-elect's policies over the coming years, here are some metrics that should be used to evaluate the approach that we have taken and compare it to the approach that's been pursued by the other side.  Since job growth turned positive in October of 2012, the U.S. economy has added jobs for 75 straight months.  This is, as I referred to earlier, the longest streak of job growth on record, and it's actually more than two years longer than the previous record.  So this is quite a streak, and we'll see if it continues.

In 2016, hourly wages increased 2.9 percent.  That's the fastest 12-month pace since the start of the recovery.  Real hourly wages have grown faster over the current business cycle than in any business cycle since the early 1970s.  Wages are obviously a metric that this administration has watched closely, and we're pleased to see that wage growth is accelerating and has accelerated over the President's tenure in office.

The third metric -- the unemployment rate has been cut by more than half since its peak of 10 percent in 2009 to 4.7 percent in December of this year.  As recently as 2014, just a couple of years ago, many economists expected the unemployment rate to remain above 5 percent until at least 2020.  So we've repeatedly beaten the predictions about driving down the unemployment rate.

Fourth, since 2010, the United States has put more people back to work than all the other G7 economies combined.  That is a strong validation of the economic strategy that President Obama pursued.  It does stand in contrast to the economic strategy that was pursued by some of our closest allies, but the results speak for themselves and it's why we regularly describe the U.S. economy as the envy of the world.

Finally -- and I don’t have a chart for this -- we can also cite a metric that we know is one that is certainly closely watched by the incoming President's economic team.  That's the stock market.  And the S&P has more than tripled since the lows that it reached in March of 2009 within President Obama's first couple of months in office.  So we certainly set a high bar.  It's a bar that we are proud of, and it's one that the incoming administration will be challenged to meet.

One other piece of news I want to share briefly this morning before we get started is, today is the last day for Pete Boogaard in the White House Press Office.  So Pete has served in the White House for a little over a year now, and has served with distinction.  But, notably, Pete spent a lot of time working in other critically important agencies of the Obama administration, including at the Department of Homeland Security.  And he is somebody who has time and again showed a lot of cool under fire.

Those of you who have worked closely with Pete understand that -- we were reminiscing shortly before the briefing that he's had some of the more challenging issues to discuss in his portfolio, everything certainly from questions about immigration policy, which includes a wide bucket of issues both that are related to homeland security and national security, but also issues like Zika.  And so we're obviously very proud of Pete's service.  He showed himself to be a dedicated professional.  And wherever he ends up next is going to be a place that's extraordinarily lucky to have him.

So, thank you, Pete, for your service.  I appreciate it.

So, with that, Josh, do you want to get started with questions?

Q    Sure.  Thank you, Josh.  And thank you, Pete, for your help and hard work over the last several years.

When we met here yesterday, the President was still being briefed on the Russia hacking report.  Now that that's concluded, is there anything you can tell us about his impressions of that or what he might have learned that moved the ball from what he had previously known about the extent of Russian hacking, or any preview that you can give us of the unclassified version that Speaker Pelosi -- Minority Leader Pelosi says will be coming out this afternoon?

MR. EARNEST:  Josh, I don’t have a specific presidential reaction to share with you about the report.  As leaders of the intelligence community testified yesterday, they are even more certain now of the assessment that they released back in October about the role that Russia played in destabilizing the U.S. elections and trying to cast doubt on the durability of our political system.  I am aware that there are reports that this review will be released later today, but for the precise timing of that I'd refer you to the intelligence community.

I'll tell you that I have not seen the report, so when the unclassified report is released, I'll be reading it along with all of you.

Q    President-elect Trump is saying that he's asking the House and Senate intelligence panels to investigate NBC News for what he says was top-secret information shared to them prior to his briefing that's taking place as we speak.  Can you say whether or not that information put in that report was top secret, and whether it was leaked by the Obama administration to a news outlet prior to President-elect Trump receiving his briefing?

MR. EARNEST:  Josh, what I can tell you is that I'm not in a position to confirm the information that was included in that report.  I’d refer you to the intelligence community for that.   I certainly feel confident in saying that that is not material that was leaked to the public by the White House, but I’d refer you to the intelligence community to speak to it beyond that.

The other observation I have, though, is I don't frequently respond to tweets from the President-elect, but I certainly do read them.  And I did read two days ago that he was tweeting a steadfast defense of the integrity of the foreigner who runs the leading purveyor of the improper release of classified information retained by the United States government.

Two days later -- two days after defending that person’s integrity, the President-elect is now expressing some concern about the possible release of this classified information.  The original tweet leads me to conclude that his concerns are about something other than protecting classified information.  What those concerns are is something that I’ll let him articulate, and presumably all of you will have an opportunity to ask about them.  But given his track record and certainly given some of the rhetoric that he used in praising WikiLeaks on the campaign trail, I think it would call into question whether or not that's the actual source of concern that he is expressing today.

Q    Just to button that up, you're ruling out that the White House leaked that information to NBC, but you're not ruling out that another -- that an agency that's part of the intelligence community or another federal agency might have done so?

MR. EARNEST:  I can't speak to the inner workings of the intelligence community, particularly as it relates to the compiling of the specific report.  The intelligence community was charged by the President of the United States with compiling a report.  And as we've discussed at some length over the last couple of months here, the men and women of the United States intelligence community are patriots.  And these are people who serve their country.  They set aside their own personal political views to do the right thing for the country.

So the President has got enormous confidence in them, believes that he’s been extraordinarily well served by them over the last eight years in providing to him timely, accurate, specific information that was not shaded to advance a political or ideological agenda, but rather was oriented toward providing him the best possible information so he could make the best possible national security decisions.

But for questions about how the intelligence community has handled specific pieces of information, you should go talk to them about that.

Q    And lastly, since you follow the President-elect’s tweets, you’ll have seen his comments about the IOU from Mexico that will pay us back for building a wall.  And I wanted to ask you about what is being discussed in Congress about using existing authorities to authorize building the wall, and then really just have new appropriations to pay for it until we get paid back.  Does the outgoing President feel that if a border wall is going to be built, that there should be a new affirmative vote in Congress to say, yes, this is what we want to do, and this is the direction we're going?

MR. EARNEST:  I have to admit, Josh, I haven’t seen all the proposals.  I know there are a couple versions of the tweets that were sent, so it’s hard to decipher exactly what the plan is.

What I can tell you about President Obama’s views is that President Obama strongly supported the largest ever investment in border security in our nation’s history that was a part of the common-sense immigration bill that this administration negotiated with Democrats and Republicans in the United States Senate.

There were billions included in that bill that would have increased security along our border -- investments in technology, investments in physical barriers, and investments in personnel to ensure that our border was secure.  Of course, that was coupled with a whole range of other proposals that would be good for our economy, that would be good for reducing the deficit, that would be good for ensuring that the United States of America is living up to our values as a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants.  It would have ensured that we are not ripping apart families.  It certainly would have ensured that we are not seeking to deport young people who are in the United States through no fault of their own, and young people who are American in every way but their papers.  That's the kind of proposal that President Obama put forward.

And it gave the millions of people who are in the United States without proper documentation an opportunity to get right with the law, and it would have required them to face some accountability measures -- background checks, paying taxes and other things -- but also would have brought them out of the shadows in a way that would be good for our economy, and in a way that would ultimately have strengthened Social Security and reduced the deficit.

But, as I said, the President-elect supports a different approach.  The only reason that the President’s approach didn’t pass is not because it didn’t have sufficient bipartisan support on Capitol Hill, but rather because it was a victim of the Republican leadership strategy to say no to everything that President Obama was inclined to support, even if it included policies that they themselves supported.  That strategy was cynical, but it did have some political benefits.  And it does go down -- the failure of that legislation to pass the House of Representatives, even though it had majority support, even though it would have passed if it had come up for a vote -- does remain one of the most disappointing and frustrating episodes in this administration’s relationship with the Republican leadership in Congress.

Jeff.

Q    Josh, a couple other questions related to the President-elect.  First, on the intelligence briefing.  President-elect Trump called the probe a “witch hunt.”  What’s the White House’s feeling about that?

MR. EARNEST:  I saw the news report.  Apparently, he had a conversation with one of your colleagues at The New York Times today.

I guess I would leave it to his team to characterize exactly what that means.  What I can tell you the President directed the intelligence community to do is to learn as much as possible about the kind of malicious cyber activity that we’ve seen in this country in the context of the 2016 election and in the previous -- recent presidential elections.  And the goal was not just to look at one country, but to look at all malicious actors in cyberspace to get to the bottom of what has recently occurred, to understand the trend which appears to be getting worse, and to develop a strategy to counter it.

There also was a desire to make sure that we’re holding accountable those who were engaged in some of those nefarious acts.  And you’ve already heard some announcements from the administration detailing some aspects of our response.  But that is the charge that the intelligence community was supposed to fulfill, and the President is pleased with the work that they’ve done.

We’ve talked a lot about the service and sacrifice of our
men and women in the intelligence community.  They worked through the holidays in order to put this report together.  And I think it’s an indication of their deep commitment to the national security of this country, to fulfilling the directives of the President of the United States.  And they have fulfilled the President’s expectations of producing a conscientious report that was briefed to him, that will be briefed to Congress, that will be briefed to the President-elect later today -- all at the President’s direction.  And the intelligence community is also prepared to follow through on the President’s final direction, which is to make as much of that report public as possible.
And again, you will have to check with them for the precise timing of that, but some reports indicate that that’s coming later today.  But that’s something that they can confirm.

Q    On another topic, following up on Josh’s question, does this White House think it’s realistic or probable that Mexico will reimburse the United States government for a wall built on its border?

MR. EARNEST:  All I would point out, Jeff, is that the Mexican government and the President of Mexico has indicated that that’s not going to happen.  But I’ll leave it to the Mexican government to respond to this, and I’ll let the President-elect try to describe how his strategy would work.

Q    And lastly, the issue of cars and tariffs has come up quite a bit in the last few days.  One of the ways that President Trump has discussed via Twitter is related to a foreign company, Toyota, making Mexican-built cars and importing them to the United States, that there would be a tariff on that.  Is that realistic?  And what is the Obama administration’s response to that issue?

MR. EARNEST:  Jeff, I’m not going to talk about one specific company.  I think what I can do is talk about what President Obama’s approach to this issue has been.  He has actually -- President Obama of course is somebody who has, over his eight years in office, learned quite a lot about the way that the U.S. auto industry works, primarily because it was poised to fail when he entered office.  And his administration had to implement a strategy to give them an opportunity to succeed.

The President made a big bet on the American auto industry, and he won because he placed his confidence in American autoworkers and giving them a chance to rebuild their companies, to retool their companies, that they would come back better and stronger than ever -- and that’s exactly what’s happened.

So the President has some credentials when it comes to understanding exactly what kinds of policies are going to benefit U.S. autoworkers and more than a million Americans whose jobs depends on that auto industry.  And the fact is that the American auto industry actually depends on an integrated global supply chain.  That’s just the way that our economy works, particularly when you’re talking about the production of a modern vehicle.  And to try to erect walls that keep out some aspects of that global supply chain or the products that are produced by that global supply chain is only going to have a detrimental impact on the industry and on the workers who rely on that industry for a job.

So the President does not believe that that’s a smart approach.  In fact, what the President believes is that the American auto industry produces the very best automobiles and vehicles in the world, and what we should be looking to do is implementing a strategy that will allow the U.S. auto industry to compete on a level playing field.  And that’s exactly the strategy that President Obama implemented with regard to the Trans-Pacific Partnership -- to go to countries like Japan and Vietnam that have large economies and a growing middle class, exactly the kinds of places where the U.S. auto industry could compete very well.  And looking for opportunities for U.S.-produced goods to be sold around the world is going to be good for our economy, it’s going to be good for American companies, but, most importantly, it’s going to be good for American jobs.

I made a reference earlier to the fact that we already know that jobs inside the United States that are tied to exports pay, on average, somewhat higher than jobs in the United States that aren’t tied to exports.  So looking for more opportunities for U.S. businesses to export their goods around the world, it’s going to be good for our economy and good for American workers.  But like I said, President-elect Trump wants to try it a different way and we’ll see if it works.

Justin.

Q    Is the President, as the leader of the Democratic Party, disappointed or upset that the DNC refused requests from the FBI to turn over their server in the hack investigation?

MR. EARNEST:  It’s not the responsibility of the President of the United States to make those kinds of decisions.  He is of course the nominal head of the Democratic Party, but the Democratic National Committee has an elected leadership that’s elected by the members of the Party, and I’ll let them speak to the way in which they cooperated with the investigation into this matter.

Q    Well, is the President, as the nominal head of the Department of Justice for the Obama administration, disappointed that the DNC didn’t seem to cooperate with FBI requests?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I’ll let the Department of Justice speak to the level of cooperation that they received from the DNC and other people who were a part of this investigation.  Obviously, this investigation was conducted separate from any sort of White House influence.  So it would be inappropriate for me to -- even if the President did have concerns -- for me to express them from here.

Q    Did you guys know that Theresa May was sending top staffers to meet with the Trump administration last month?  And have you or the State Department -- has Theresa May’s staff sought advice from you or the State Department on her interactions with the President-elect?

THE PRESIDENT:  I can’t speak to what staff-level conversations may have occurred between representatives of the United States government and representatives of Prime Minister May’s office.  I can tell you that what the Obama administration has sought to do is to work effectively with our allies and with the President-elect’s team to ensure a smooth handoff in the context of the transition, and that includes a smooth handoff of the relationship between the United States and some of our closest allies around the world.  But I can’t speak with much precision about conversations that may have occurred in advance of those kinds of conversations.

Q    Lastly, yesterday you promised some preview of the President’s speech next week in Chicago.  So I’m wondering if you could maybe talk either about some color about how that’s developing or what's --

MR. EARNEST:  What I can tell you is that I anticipate that the President is going to be devoting a significant portion of his weekend to working on the address.  I’ve had an opportunity to review a very early draft, and what I can tell you is that the President is interested in delivering a farewell address that’s forward-looking.

We’ve had ample opportunity, certainly over the last year and over the last couple of months, to review the many significant accomplishments of the Obama administration, and I’m confident there will be a reference or two to that progress in the speech that he’ll deliver Tuesday night.  But primarily the President is hopeful about the future of the country, particularly if our citizens are engaged in our democracy and if our leaders draw upon the longstanding, deeply-held views of this country to confront the challenges ahead.

If that happens, if both those things happen, then the President believes that the prospects for the United States being even more safe, and more prosperous, and more fair are bright.  And the President is obviously proud of the progress that we have made and continues to be optimistic about our future, and he’s looking forward to an opportunity to talk about why.

Lana.

Q    So the President has obviously been spending a lot of time talking about Obamacare and trying to fight back against Republican efforts to repeal without a replacement in plan -- in place, rather.  After January 20th, is he going to continue that same effort at that same level, or will he, as he was saying before, become a private citizen and just a regular citizen of the United States, and will that then sort of fade away, or will there be a break from that?

MR. EARNEST:  The President will be a private citizen on January 20th.  He will be a private citizen with deeply held views about the most effective way to reform the health care system in the United States.  Many of those views and ideas have been put into action in a way that's been extraordinarily beneficial for the American people and for our economy.  And the President is proud of that progress.

And you could certainly expect the President to follow these developments closely and to continue to be thinking about how these kinds of reforms should work.  But there is a long tradition in our country -- and President Obama benefited from it in the early days of his presidency -- of the outgoing President giving the incoming President the opportunity to succeed.

So I would not expect President Obama to be regularly holding conversations with Ezra Klein and Sarah Kliff at some other house in Washington, D.C.  He did that at Blair House today as the sitting President of the United States.  But the President believes that other people, including congressional Democrats, but not only congressional Democrats, are going to have to step forward and take up the mantle and wage this fight on behalf of the American people.

The prospect of Republicans repealing the Affordable Care Act without a replacement would inject unprecedented chaos into our health care system, which constitutes about a fifth of the U.S. economy.  It also is going to prompt up to 30 million Americans to lose their health insurance and put at risk many of the gains that we've made in protecting the 130 million Americans that have preexisting conditions.  If you repeal the Affordable Care Act, you take away those protections.  And those are protections that extend not just to people who are purchasing health insurance through Obamacare marketplaces, but it also includes all those Americans that get their health insurance through their employer.  So the stakes are significant.  And President Obama will remain engaged to the extent that he’ll be following exactly what kind of developments occur, he’ll continue thinking about these issues.

But when it comes to making the public case with this approach, it’s time for other people to step up.  And the President is confident that there are plenty of Democrats with the right values and the right passion and the right skills to make a persuasive case that will ultimately benefit the American public.

Q    Just to be clear, with all of his passion that he feels about Obamacare and how he feels about that issue, come January 20th we should not expect to see the President making public speeches about it, writing more op-eds, those sorts of things?

MR. EARNEST:  The President has had ample opportunity over the last eight years to regularly make speeches and regularly write op-eds on topics that are near and dear to his heart, including the effective implementation of health care reform.  So the time for him to do that on a regular basis has passed, and so I would not expect him to do that with much frequency at all as a former President.

Q    Can the White House confirm that Obama-appointed diplomats have been asked to leave their post by January 20th?

MR. EARNEST:  I saw the -- I’ve seen this news report.  For all of the details, I’d refer you to the State Department.

What I can tell you is that it is, of course, customary for politically appointed chiefs of mission to return back to the United States on Inauguration Day and afford the incoming administration and the incoming President the opportunity to select his own representatives to advance our country’s interests in countries around the world.

What I will say is this administration is extraordinarily proud of the service of the politically appointed ambassadors of the United States government who have advanced our interests in countries large and small around the world.  In many cases, these are men and who are professionals in a separate career.  But they have chosen to dedicate a number of years of their life to public service in a really important way.

In many of these countries where President Obama has traveled, the U.S. ambassador is a prominent public face of the United States of America.  And the way that that person chooses to conduct themselves and their personal lives, the way that that person speaks publicly and advances our interests and articulates our values in that country is extraordinarily important.  And many of these professionals have taken advantage of this opportunity, and America is better for it.

And we certainly owe them a debt of gratitude for their public service.  And we certainly will be hoping that the incoming administration will choose people as effective and as talented and as patriotic as have served in these kinds of positions under President Obama.

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  I want to ask you about race.  The President made some comments about the state of race relations in the country.  It has been a difficult time, to say the least, in the city of Chicago in the wake of that Facebook post.  I’m curious -- two parts to this question.  The first part is, is it fair to describe the President’s optimism about the future of race relations in this country based solely on his experience, the trajectory of him growing up and having seen the country in a very different way as President?  And does he also understand the negative perception many have about the state of race relations in the country today?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, I think that the President’s optimism about the progress that our country has made on the issue of race is rooted primarily in our experience as a country, in our experience as a society.

There are a lot of examples of this.  And I think the most pertinent one could be around the issue of the relationship between some local law enforcement agencies and the African American community that they're sworn to serve and protect.  There are some communities that have been -- where a significant gap has been exposed.

And the President often will cite that it was not that long ago, 20 or 25 years ago, that you had the city of Los Angeles that after a high-profile incident where there were deep concerns about police brutality against a black motorist, that that city was in flames, and that you saw a stark racial divide emerge immediately that was distressing to many people in the country.

And while that gap and that gulf in some communities still exists, the response has been much different; that there are certainly places where there have been public demonstrations and some civil unrest, but nothing on the scale of what we saw in Los Angeles.  And I think what’s also notable is that there are a number of prominent voices of all races who are speaking out trying to bridge that divide.

So I think that’s an apt illustration of the situation that we find ourselves in, which is that we’ve made important progress in a way that actually makes a difference in the lives of Americans in communities all across the country.  But we still got a lot of work to do if we’re going to solve that problem.  And the President also feels optimistic because he has seen the commitment that’s been shown by young people -- many of them African American, but not all African American -- who are seeking to organize in their communities, who are seeking to protest the government and make their voice heard, and bring about the kind of change that they would like to see in their community.

And the President is optimistic that they’re going to have an impact -- a positive impact -- in addressing those concerns and in healing some of those divisions.  And it’s this younger generation of activists and younger generation of leaders who the President continues to be optimistic will be able to continue the kind of progress that we’ve made in healing the racial divide in this country.

Q    I know you’re not being (inaudible) and I respect what you said, but I think there are a number of people that feel very pessimistic when they see incidents like what happened in that Facebook post, when they see shootings -- motorist in South Carolina, the devastating attacks in Dallas.  Is the President sensitive to that?

MR. EARNEST:  Of course, he is.  And I think the President himself has expressed his own profound concerns and disappointment and, in some cases, outrage about many of the incidents that you've described, including the Facebook video that drew so much outrage and attention in the last couple of days.

So the President certainly understands that we’ve got a lot of work to do, and there are reasons for people to feel pessimistic that we haven’t made as much progress as we would like.  But in the President’s mind, it’s impossible to deny that we have, in fact, made progress.  And the fact that you see people of a variety of races speaking out on these issues with one voice, appealing to the same kinds of values, gives the President a lot of optimism that these are problems that can be resolved, where we can make progress.  And there certainly is work to be done.

Look, to go back to something you raised in your first question, there’s no denying that the President’s personal journey and the personal progress that he’s made is one indication of the progress that we’ve made as a country.  The President I think spoke very eloquently about this at Selma a year and a half ago, where you essentially had African Americans who were being beaten and abused by local law enforcement with water cannons and dogs, trying to get -- just so they could have the right to cast a ballot.  And 50 years later, you have an African American President of the United States.

That’s remarkable progress.  Doesn’t mean that all our work is done, because in too many communities across the country we are seeing people from the minority community being disadvantaged and being denied the right to vote, or at least having had their ability to vote obstructed because of cynical partisan policies that have been put in place.

So there’s a whole lot more work to be done on that, but certainly the President’s story is one powerful indication of the progress that we’ve made, but it’s far from the only one.

Q    I want to ask you about detainee transfers.  We talked a bit about the dwindling number of detainees that are still housed at the facility at Guantanamo.  Can you give an update on that and whether or not that will continue to be the trajectory as we wind down the last 14 days?

MR. EARNEST:  Kevin, I know you’ve been following this closely, so I know that you saw the announcement from the Department of Defense yesterday about the transfer of four Yemeni nationals from the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay to Saudi Arabia.  That transfer was effectuated after the 30-day notification was provided to Congress, and after a comprehensive review was conducted by the U.S. -- by the President’s national security team, including a number of agencies, including the intelligence community, about these individuals being safe to transfer to Saudi Arabia under a set of security restrictions that would limit their ability to threaten the United States.

This does bring the prison population -- or the population at Guantanamo Bay to 55.  And when President Obama took office, the detainee population at Gitmo was 242.  And in that time, we’ve move 183 detainees to 42 countries.  And that certainly is an indication of the progress that we have made in reducing the prison population.

But the President does continue to be concerned principally about two things.  One is, as the Gitmo facility continues to remain in operation, it continues to serve as a recruiting tool for extremists who hold that up as an example of the United States not living up to the kinds of values that we claim to be fighting for.  And to continue to operate that facility is to continue to give terrorist recruiters a valuable tool.

Secondly, the President is also concerned about the highly inefficient waste of taxpayer dollars.  The cost of operating the facility at Gitmo is significantly higher than the cost of operating a similar facility that would effectively safeguard our national security by housing them here in the United States.  And there has been no good reasonable explanation put forward about why Congress is intent on preventing that from happening.

Q    Can I get a cost-per-detainee sort of analysis maybe?

MR. EARNEST:  We’ll see if we can get you some metrics to put some numbers around that cost-benefit analysis.

Ron.

Q    On the economy, the President is also going to leave office I believe with the distinction of being the first President since Herbert Hoover not to experience a year of growth at 3 percent GDP.  That’s correct, right?

MR. EARNEST:  I hadn’t heard that statistic, but we can certainly look into it to confirm it for you.

Q    That’s what I’ve read, that --

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.  We’ll look into it.

Q    Assuming that is the truth, does the President accept responsibility for that, as well?  And how do you explain that -- you know sluggish growth has been a problem throughout the eight years.  How do you explain that -- how do you square that with this historic job growth and so on and so forth?  And I think -- the other thing is that some would argue that slow growth is in part what’s contributed to this feeling of anxiety in the country that things aren’t getting better, and that, in fact, may be one of the crucial variables that just won the election, if you want to keep on going down this road.  The question is, how much responsibility does the President accept for the sluggish growth thing?  Because I think you're going to say, well, look where we started and look at what Congress did and didn’t do, so on and so forth.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I'll say a couple things about that.  The first is, the President of the United States is somebody who takes responsibility for what happens in this country while he's President, and President Obama has certainly done that in a variety of settings.  Many observers have indicated the important role that the private sector plays in driving our economy, and President Obama has been the first to acknowledge that.  He himself gives credit to the private sector driving our recovery.  And that recovery has been historic.  The President himself has also frequently made the observation that the financial crisis that the United States encountered was not just significant, it was historic -- the largest recession in our nation's history since the Great Depression.  And all that occurred right as President Obama was taking office.  And so we were digging out of a historically large hole, certainly the largest hole that any President faced dating back to the early stages of the 20th century.

Q    Just on this -- so how long does the argument last of "look at the hole we started in"?  For example, how long is that a valid argument into the next administration?  You're seven years into it now.  You see the point?  How long is that a valid explanation for why growth has been so slow?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me say one other thing and then I'll get to that question, which is -- and you alluded to this, but it's relevant -- during the President's first two years in office, he was able to work effectively with Democratic majorities in the House and Senate to put in place the economic policies that did lay the groundwork for our recovery, everything from the Recovery Act, including the Affordable Care Act.  These are policies that were beneficial to the economy, and they led to the kind of growth and progress that is the envy of the world.

Since then, even the kinds of proposals that have typically enjoyed bipartisan support, that the President has put forward, have not gotten them -- infrastructure investments, immigration reform, even the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  All of those are things that would have had a tangible, positive impact on the economy and on job creation.

So the President is proud of his economic record, and the progress that we've made is historic.  And there is no other President that can cite the kind of job creation streak that President Obama can cite based on what's happened in the economy while he's been President.  But there certainly is more that the President believes that we could have done and should have done.  But that was not possible because of the obstruction that we ran in to once Republicans took control of the United States Congress.

With regard to this question about how do Presidents put into context what they did with their time in office, the President makes what I think is a pretty common-sense illustration of this, which is that he's a better runner in a relay race, and he took the baton from President George W. Bush. And when he took the baton, our economy was at the bottom of a deep hole -- was plunging to the bottom of a deep hole.  And he had a lot of uphill running to do while he was holding that baton.  That's not a situation that President Trump will face.  President Trump, not for the first time in his life, will inherit a much more financially beneficial situation.  And he'll have an opportunity to build on that momentum.

So I think you can make a strong case that the standard that he should be held to is even higher.  He's got many more advantages.  He's got the wind at his back.  He's got a stable financial system.  He's got an economy that's built up momentum, when you evaluate economic growth, when you evaluate job creation, when you evaluate wage growth.  And what he does with all of those advantages that he's inherited is up to him, and he'll face -- we'll have an opportunity to evaluate his performance.

Q    To follow up on this intelligence briefing matter, back-and-forth, and given that the President and the President-elect have some rapport and have this handful of exchanges by phone and then otherwise, would you expect that there might be a conversation between the two of them about this briefing and what it means, and this particular issue because it's so prominent and because I would imagine the President feels so passionately about it?

MR. EARNEST:  There is not plan for the President to call the President-elect.  That's not on his schedule today.  So I suppose if the President-elect were to call him, he'd return the call.  He's been doing that -- done that a number of times since the election.

But, look, as our intelligence leaders testified yesterday, there's not a lot of ambiguity in this situation.  They're not expressing a lot of ambiguity in their public statements.  Certainly, their October statement was not ambiguous.  Their testimony yesterday before Congress was not ambiguous.  I'll let them speak to what's included in the report, and we'll have an opportunity to take a look at the unclassified report when it's released.  I'd be surprised if there's anything in there that's particularly ambiguous.  If there is, it may be because of the need to protect sources and methods.  But --

Q    And because of the lack of ambiguity, as you point out and others have, and because this is a matter of national security, is it reasonable to expect that the President of the United States might call up the President-elect and say, look, you need to think about this differently?  I mean, it would just seem like a natural thing to do if, in fact, the President is so concerned about this, as he rightfully perhaps should be and has said that he is.

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, I think what I can tell you is I certainly wouldn’t rule out that this is an issue that they've discussed previously.  Now, I'm going to protect their ability to have private conversations, so I can't sort of catalogue the conversations that they've had.  But I think common sense would lead you to conclude that this an issue that they've talked about before.  And given the significance of this incident and given the unambiguous nature of the intelligence community's work, I suspect that this is an issue that will continue to be discussed both publicly and privately.

Certainly, we've seen leaders on Capitol Hill, including Republicans, indicate their commitment to continuing to investigate this matter and learn as much as they can about it, and begin to take steps to prevent the kind of negative impact we saw from happening again.  So I guess I wouldn’t rule out future conversations, but I do not anticipate a telephone call between the President and the President-elect on this specific topic today.  But of course, if the President-elect calls the President of the United States, he'll call him back.

Q    There could be other communications methods.

MR. EARNEST:  There could be.  So that's part of our commitment to the transition.

Q    Just using my common sense, as you've suggested, it would seem logical, then, that the President has talked to him about this, and yet the President-elect has still expressed publicly so much skepticism about the intelligence findings.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, they obviously disagree on a lot of things.

Q    And just on this whole matter of tweeting --

MR. EARNEST:  Maybe that’s the understatement of the day, huh?  (Laughter.)

Q    On this matter on -- you made a reference to tweeting earlier, that you read all of them but you don’t --

MR. EARNEST:  I try to.  It’s hard to keep up sometimes.

Q    What does the President think about that?  The fact that he does this -- not necessarily the content, but the fact that the President-elect is communicating in this manner.

MR. EARNEST:  I think you can tell from the President’s communication style that he believes that communicating in a different way plays to his strengths, and I think in some ways that contrast was quite stark.  Even just this morning, the President was engaged in a serious, detailed, long discussion of the intricacies of health care policy.  Those are the kinds of arguments and facts and presentations that don’t lend themselves to 140-character limits.

But obviously, the President-elect has a different communication style and it certainly contributed to some of his success in building support for his campaign.  Whether that’s a style that he believes will benefit him once he has assumed all of the awesome responsibilities of the President of the United States is something that I think we’ll all just have to wait to find out.

Q    And given all these awesome responsibilities, does the President think, as others have said, that this method of communication is dangerous?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess I should also clarify, President Obama has a Twitter feed too.  He’s got tens of millions of supporters and followers on Twitter -- or presumably they aren’t all supporters.  I’m sure they’re not.

But he’s got a lot of followers on Twitter.  It can be an effective method of communication, but when every word and the meaning of every utterance is so closely scrutinized to try to detect its precise impact on global events, sometimes the 140- character limit has some downsides.  Sometimes it requires some more explanation to make sure people understand exactly what you mean.  And when you’re President of the United States, it’s important for people in this country and around the world to understand exactly what you mean.

Q    And lastly, in other news, you said you might have some details about the party tonight.

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have additional details about the party tonight.

Q    Or any details.

MR. EARNEST:  As I mentioned earlier, the President and First Lady are hosting a party here at the White House tonight.  It will be an opportunity for them to spend some time with their friends, and I suspect it will be the last opportunity for them to be able to host such an event before they leave the White House.

Q    Any names on the guest list?

MR. EARNEST:  No names that I have to release from here.

Q    Hundreds of people?  Millions of people?

MR. EARNEST:  It will not be millions of people.  (Laughter.)  It will be smaller than that.  But the President and First Lady are looking forward to it, and this is something that they’ve done before, and it’s one of the things that they will miss about the White House in terms of their personal life and being able to share some of the -- how special that is with their friends in the way that millions of Americans have gotten a glimpse of the specialness of the White House through White House tours.

Q    Are you going?

MR. EARNEST:  I’ll keep you posted on my Friday night plans.

Mark.

Q    By any chance did you ask President Obama about what Vice President Biden said yesterday -- that Donald Trump ought to grow up when it comes to some of his tweets and name-calling?

MR. EARNEST:  I did not speak to President Obama about it.  I can give you my reaction, if you care, which is just simply that Vice President Biden is somebody who, through his four-decade career here in Washington, has developed a reputation for an avuncular communication style.

Q    Avuncular?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah.  It seems to generate headlines sometimes, but I think what many people have found is that they have benefitted from following the advice of Vice President Biden.

Q    Would a comment like that be in the spirit of the smooth and seamless transition that President Obama wanted?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I think the Vice President, just like everybody else in this administration, has in words and deeds demonstrated a clear commitment and extended courtesies to the incoming President’s team.

And I know that that is certainly true of the Vice President’s staff, but I also know that that’s true of the Vice President himself.  Earlier this week, he happened to be walking the halls at the same time that somebody on our team was showing my successor around the West Wing, and the Vice President graciously invited Mr. Spicer into this office and spent some time talking to him about how special it is to work at the White House.  And I think that's a pretty clear indication of the Vice President’s commitment to ensuring that all of us -- including the Vice President -- are committed to the kind of smooth and effective transition that President Obama directed.

Q    And earlier in an answer to Ron, you said the President is proud of his economic record.  How does that statement relate to the national debt, an issue that we rarely hear on in this room or from the President, a national debt that is nearing $20 trillion, an 87 percent increase over what it was when he took office?  Certainly -- well, would you regard that as a blot on his economic record?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Mark, I think certainly the President’s record when it comes to fiscal responsibility is quite strong. The deficit has been reduced by two-thirds since President Obama took office.  And the reason that that's important is if we can get the deficit-to-GDP ratio down around 3 percent, that's going to allow us to stabilize the debt as a percentage of GDP.  And that's the metric that economists look at.

And there has been a lot of progress made in terms of asking those at the top of the income scale to pay a little bit more, in terms of strengthening the economy and raising the amount of tax revenue that's coming into the U.S. government.

There have also been some cuts to government spending, some of which were fashioned in a different way than President Obama would have preferred, but yet resulted in the kind of deficit reduction that's been good for the country and good for our economy.  But there is more work that needs to be done to address the medium- and long-term consequences of the nation’s fiscal picture.  And that will certainly be something that the incoming President and the Republican leadership in Congress will have to address.

We certainly have heard a lot from congressional Republicans about their desire to reduce the deficit.  And we’ll see if they have the same success that President Obama has had
in reducing the deficit by two-thirds over the next eight years.

Dave.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  We’re talking a lot about domestic policy today.  Will the President in his speech in Chicago discuss foreign policy at all?

MR. EARNEST:  I would anticipate that the President will talk a little bit about the work that is necessary to advance our interests and to keep America safe.  But I would not anticipate that that will be the focus of his farewell address.

Q    What do you say to people who argue that given the continued problems in the Middle East and Syria and in Iraq, the inability to defeat ISIS completely, the growing tensions and years-long problems with Russia that seem to be increasing, even the problems in Europe that seem to be growing with democracies, people losing power, and allies facing new challenges -- what do you say to people who would argue that the President has not left the country in a stronger position in foreign affairs for Trump?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’d say a couple things about that, and I appreciate you giving me the opportunity to do that.

The first is that when President Obama took office, there were 180,000 U.S. servicemembers in Iraq and Afghanistan, and today that number is down below 15,000, I believe.  And I think that is an indication of the important progress that President Obama has made.

Each President is going to face unique challenges and a unique set of circumstances in the international community.  And what President Obama has sought to do is to strengthen our relationships with our closest allies.  And the President feels good about the progress that we’ve made in strengthening our relationship with countries who are part of our NATO Alliance.  The incoming President indicated that he might try to do something a little bit different.  This President certainly hopes that he won’t, but we’ll have to see how he chooses to manage those relationships.

President Obama is proud of the way that we have overhauled and strengthened the relationship that the United States has with countries throughout the Western Hemisphere, and some of that is because of the policy change that we made with regard to Cuba.  That certainly has created ample opportunities for the United States to strengthen our relationship with countries throughout Latin America.  Obviously, the President had the opportunity to visit Argentina in 2016.  That was a good example of some of the improvements that we’ve made.

I will say that the President is disappointed that Congress didn’t act to ratify the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  That certainly had the potential to strengthen our security and economic relationships throughout the Asia Pacific.  That was a missed opportunity, but I don’t think that’s one that you can pin on the President of the United States, because he did the hard work of negotiating the kind of an agreement that would have advanced our interests, and it didn’t move forward because of Congress’s failure to act.

The last thing I’ll say is when President Obama took office, the number-one threat that was identified by the United States and our allies around the world was the risk that Iran would develop a nuclear weapon.  That would be extraordinarily destabilizing to not just the Middle East, but to the world.  It would be extraordinarily concerning to our closest ally, Israel.  And it would pose a threat to our allies in Europe that are within range of some of Iran’s missile capabilities.

But because of the principled, hardnosed diplomacy of this administration, the United States succeeded in reaching an international agreement to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon.  And the international community can now verify that Iran does not have a nuclear weapon, and is now farther away from being able to get a nuclear weapon than they have been in some time, and there are restrictions in place to make sure that that timeframe is not shortened.  And if it is, the international community will know about it and will be able to react.

But all of that was accomplished without deploying a single soldier or firing a single shot.  And that certainly is a testament to the President’s success in addressing some of the most significant threats facing the United States.

And then I’ll end just by mentioning the fact that President Obama took office with Osama bin Laden continuing to try to menace the United States.  He no longer is in a position to do that.

Michelle.

Q    While we’ve been sitting here, there’s been a shooting at Fort Lauderdale Airport in a baggage claim area, and it seems like multiple people have been shot and multiple people have been killed.  Given that we don’t know what the motive is, do you know at this point, or do any of you know if the President has been notified?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t know if the President’s has been notified but we can certainly look into that for you.  Obviously these are the kinds of events that we see all too often here in the United States.  And our thoughts and prayers right now are with those who are potentially affected, and certainly with the first responders in south Florida who right now are surely putting themselves in harm’s way to try to protect innocent people.  And so we’re thinking about them right now, and we’ll
President getting updated on this situation.  And we’ll let you know as soon as we can.

Q    Okay, and what do you think of the President-elect asking Congress now -- and he says he’s going to ask congressional committees -- to investigate the leaking of information to -- NBC News is the only one he named.  What’s your reaction to that, especially given that this administration prosecuted leakers multiple times?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, as I mentioned to Josh, just two days ago on his Twitter feed the President-elect was defending the integrity of the foreigner who is the leading purveyor of government secrets maintained by the United States that we’d prefer not be released.  These are secrets that have made the United States -- by virtue of their release, has made the United States less safe and has put our men and women in uniform and our men and women in the intelligence community at greater risk.  Why he’s defending his integrity, I do not know.  But it would lead me to conclude that the tweet that he sent today about NBC was prompted by something other than his concern about the inappropriate release of classified information.

Q    So would you disagree with calling for an investigation on this particular leak?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, obviously he called on Congress to take a look at it, and I’ll defer to members of Congress about how they want to use their investigative authorities.

The one thing I think I would point out is that the Department of Justice with regard to the way that they interact, the way that they conduct leak investigations, and the way that they interact with reporters and protect the First Amendment rights of reporters, they have made clear and codified that journalists should not face punishment just for doing their job.  And that is a principle that has been established and strengthened and codified by the Obama administration.  And hopefully that's something that Mr. Sessions will continue, if and when he is confirmed to be the next leader of the Department of Justice.

Q    Okay, and the President said something interesting today during that Vox interview.  He said that he would support a repeal of Obamacare if the replacement was something better.  And that's a lot different than what we've been talking about in here that you said Democrats shouldn’t even work with Republicans if repeal is a method they choose.  So do you think the President was saying something different here?  Or was that just his way of saying in his view there’s no way that anything is going to be better?

MR. EARNEST:  I think what he was -- he was actually giving voice to the same argument that I was making, which is simply that if Republicans are willing to sit down and look for ways to improve the health care system, improve upon Obamacare, and are willing to work with Democrats to do that, then the President believes that Democrats should work with them.  And it sounded to me like today he volunteered to be one of them.

Q    But even if they want to repeal it?  It sounds like he’s saying something different than --

MR. EARNEST:  The President is simply saying that if Republicans have ideas that will be better for the American people, better for our economy -- and we’ve got a way to judge, right, based on the people that -- based on the way that access to health care has dramatically expanded under the Affordable Care Act, based on the consumer protections that are in place, based on the way that the deficit has been reduced, based on the way that the Medicare trust fund has been strengthened.  If Republicans have a plan to meet all of that criteria and they can do it, and it cover even more people or do it for even less money, then President Obama -- I guess the point the President is making is there’s no pride of authorship here.  And I think that should have been evident from the beginning as the President invited Republicans to take the pen and to put forward their own ideas.  And in fact, the President has willingly shared credit with the Heritage Foundation, who originally conceived of some of the key aspects of this plan.  He has readily shared credit with people like Mitt Romney, whose health care plan in Massachusetts served as a template for the Affordable Care Act.

He didn’t do that because he’s good buddies with Mitt Romney -- he’s not.  Mitt Romney ran against him in 2012, but yet President Obama was willing to use the template that he developed because it was a good idea, and it worked in Massachusetts and it’s worked for the United States of America.

So the President is basically making the point there’s no pride of authorship here.  If Republicans have ideas that are actually going to make the health care system better, the President will help them and encourage them and support them as they try to implement it.  The problem has been that for seven years, Republicans have insisted on simply voting to repeal the law without ever putting forward any sort of realistic plan to replace it.  And some of the ideas that they have floated would not make the health care system in this country better or cheaper or cover more people; it would make many of those problems worse.

And that’s the tension.  As long as Republicans are only focused on throwing our health care system into chaos, I don’t think they’re going to find much support at all from Democrats.  And I think they’re going to have trouble maintaining support among a lot of Republicans who are concerned about the impact that chaos would have on families and businesses in their home states.

Let’s see -- Olivier.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Over the last eight years we’ve seen a series of spectacular cyber intrusions, whether by the United States or against the United States.  I’m wondering under what circumstances the President thinks either an act of hacking or an act of cyber sabotage becomes an act of war.

MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t asked this policy question of the President or our experts.  With regard to the Russian involvement in malicious cyber activity that was aimed at trying to destabilize our election, the President believed that that was a very serious incident.  That’s what led to the extraordinary statement from the intelligence community.  That’s what led to the serious response that was publicized by the administration last week.  That’s what led the President of the United States to raise these issues directly with President Putin when they saw one another in Asia this past fall.  And I think that’s why -- I know that’s why the President also directed the intelligence community to produce a comprehensive report that could be shared not just with this administration but with the incoming administration, with members of Congress in both parties, and with the public about what exactly happened.  Getting to the bottom of this is important because what happened is so serious.

But I will say that I’d want you to talk to somebody with a little bit more expertise in this policy area before I took on the hypothetical question about what kind of malicious cyber activity would genuinely constitute an act of war.

Q    I ask because this morning at a breakfast with reporters, Senator Bob Corker, the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, suggested that the question of intent here was paramount, saying that the collection of information is not an act of war, but perhaps the use of that information might be.  And that’s why I’m asking sort of what the President’s criteria are -- not so much hypothetical -- what are they.

MR. EARNEST:  Without having thought through a lot of that, I think that certainly is a reasonable statement from Senator Corker that intent of the malicious actor is not irrelevant.  And I know that the intelligence community, as we previously stated, has done a lot of work to try to understand not just what Russia did and how they did it, but also to try to get some insight into what their motivation may have been and what their goal may have been.

We know at least one of their goals was to raise some doubts about the integrity of our system of democracy and the ability of the United States government to execute an election.  But if there were additional motivations, we’ll have to see what the intelligence community has been able to learn.

John, I’ll give you the last one, then we’ll do the week ahead.

Q    Thank you very much, Josh.  You’ve said repeatedly, including just a few minutes ago, that the Republicans in Congress have no alternative to the Affordable Health Care Act if it’s repealed, and yet in 2015, when the Supreme Court looked again at its constitutionality, Senator Cassidy of Louisiana, himself a doctor, unveiled a detailed plan with -- keeping some aspects of the previous plan, but offering new ones.  Today, Republicans on Capitol Hill say they have seven plans that are on the table, including Senator Cassidy’s.  Why is there sort of a difference in your view and what they're saying on the Hill, and in particular in the case of one senator who did put forth a plan?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think, John, right now it’s a pretty simple situation that we have, which is if Republicans had a plan that they had confidence in, that they believed measured up to the Affordable Care Act, that they believed would garner sufficient political support among Republicans on Capitol Hill, then why wouldn’t they put it forward?

But even the Speaker of the House himself is saying they’ll get around to putting forward a replacement at some point, hopefully later this year.  If there are so many plans that they've been talking about for so long, why aren’t they prepared to put them forward and use them as the replacement for the Affordable Care Act?

So they’ll have -- because the truth is, John -- this is the other part of it that I think is relevant.  It is new that Republicans for the first time are in charge of the White House, but it’s not new that Republicans are in charge of the Congress for the first time.

They had congressional majorities last year and the year before that.  And I’m not aware of those Republicans using their majority to pass an Obamacare alternative.  They didn't.  So that's why I doubt that there actually is a plan that they're willing to put forward, that they're willing to stand behind, that they're willing to evaluate in comparison to all of the benefits of the Affordable Care Act that the American people have been enjoying for years now.

Q    The other question that I had was, there was a number, 1,030 -- 1,030 -- that I’m sure you've seen that's been in numerous articles from Christmas to January.

MR. EARNEST:  You're laying it on thick here, John.

Q    All right.  I’m just telling you.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.

Q    That is the number of Democratic senators, governors, U.S. representatives, and state legislators who have lost their seats to Republicans in the last eight years under President Obama.  As the leader of the Democratic Party, a position you mentioned earlier, has he ever expressed any thoughts about these losses, which I believe are the biggest for an incumbent President since Herbert Hoover was President during the Depression?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, John, I think it’s always important to evaluate the context of those numbers.  And one important piece of context is simply that there was an historic wave that entered office at the end of 2008 and the beginning of 2009 of Democratic elected officials who benefitted from President Obama being at the top of the ballot in 2008.  So when we're talking about those kinds of numbers, it’s important to recognize that those numbers got built up in the first place because of President Obama’s political success in winning the White House the first time.

That said, the President is the leader of the Democratic Party.  And he has been disappointed, particularly with regard to this most recent election, that a lot of good Democratic elected officials, public servants didn't succeed at the ballot box.  And the President has expressed his view about why that is.  It includes the need for Democratic activists and Democratic voters to express their view persuasively in communities all across the country, and that certainly is part of the challenge that President Obama is going to spend some time thinking about as a former President.  And this will certainly be the challenge that the incoming Democratic Party chairman will take on in taking office and making sure that Democrats are showing up and competing in communities all across the country.

We’ve got the values right, we’ve got the policy prescriptions right, but we just need to go and make the argument.  And the President is confident that if and when Democrats do that, there are important gains for the party and for the country that lie ahead.

Let me just run through the week ahead real quick.

On Saturday, the President will travel to Jacksonville, Florida to attend the wedding ceremony of a White House staffer.  There will be no media coverage of the event.  This is just a private event and the President is looking forward to it.

On Monday, the President will attend meetings at the White House.

On Tuesday, the President will travel to Chicago, Illinois, as we’ve discussed, to deliver his farewell address to the American people.  In the address, he will thank his supporters, celebrate the ways the country has changed these past eight years, and offer some thoughts on where the country will go from here.  The First Lady, the Vice President, and Dr. Biden will also attend.

Through the rest of the week, the President intends to attend meetings at the White House and it should be an interesting week.

Thanks, everybody, have a great weekend.

Q    Can you tell us the staffer’s name or --

MR. EARNEST:  We’ll follow up with you on that tomorrow.

Thanks, everybody.

END
2:11 P.M.
12:37 P.M. EST

MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Nice to see you all.  Before we get started, I did want to call to your attention an announcement that was made briefly by the U.S. government earlier this morning.

The United States, this morning, at the WTO, the World Trade Organization, announced that we had filed a case against China for artificially cheap loans from banks and low-priced inputs for Chinese aluminum.  The case that we have made is that those cheap loans and low-priced inputs are contributing to excess global capacity and undercutting American workers and businesses.

Today's action follows numerous bilateral efforts by the Obama administration to persuade China to take strong steps to address the excess capacity situation in its aluminum sector.  Those of you who have been following along know that this is the 16th trade enforcement challenge the Obama administration has launched against China at the WTO.  It's a demonstration of our commitment to hold China to its trade obligations.

And, of course, the incoming administration has spoken forcefully about their commitment to standing up for the United States when it comes to global trade.  The incoming administration has suggested that they would consider imposing high tariffs and building walls in ways that economists have said would be damaging to workers, U.S. workers, bad for U.S. businesses, bad for U.S. entrepreneurs, bad for the broader American economy, and bad for American college graduates that are entering the workforce.

The Obama administration has taken a different approach.  And as I have on a number of a policies, I would invite you to, as you consider the policies that are put forward by the incoming administration, evaluate their performance based on the approach that President Obama has pursued.  And I will spare you the long recitation of the dramatic improvement we've seen in our economy, because that certainly is the backdrop for all of this.

But when it comes specifically to trade enforcement, you should remember that the United States, during the Obama administration over the last eight years, has filed more cases at the WTO than any other country.  Now, in some ways that makes sense because the U.S. economy is so large and benefits from our strong relationships with other countries overseas, but it's an illustration of how aggressively the Obama administration has worked to protect our economy here in the United States in the context of our trade relationships.  Twenty-five cases filed at the WTO against other countries, by the United States, under President Obama's leadership.

Of those cases, the United States has won every single one that's been decided.  Fourteen of the twenty-five cases have been decided.  We're 14 and 0 in those cases.  There are six others that have been settled in our favor.  That, of course, means that there are five that are still pending, including the one that was announced today.

Of the 25 that we have filed at the WTO, 16 of them have been filed against China -- more than any other country over the last eight years.  And as you would expect -- those of you who are good at math will predict this -- of the cases that have been decided, that we filed against China, we won them all -- seven -- we're 7 and 0 -- and that included cases that we won at the WTO to protect the American economy related to China policies that impact American-grown agricultural goods, American poultry, American-made manufacturing goods, including high-tech steel, cars and SUVs, airplanes, textiles, and medical products.

So, at some point next year, you will hear a robust case from the incoming administration about their proposal to ensure that America and our economy is protected when it comes to global trade.  They'll have a very high standard to meet when you consider the success of the Obama administration, not just in terms of bringing these cases to the WTO, but also when you consider the performance of our broader economy.

So with that, we'll go to your questions.  Vivian, it's nice to see you.  Welcome to the briefing room.

Q    Hi, thanks.  I moved in a little early.

MR. EARNEST:  (Laughter.)  Good.  Why don’t you get us started today?

Q    Sure.  So the transition team has been really touting the fact that they have not had a very easygoing -- with the hearings -- that the Obama administration, they say, kind of had smooth sailing through their nominees, that their nominees had smooth sailing throughout their whole process.  And so I just wanted to kind of hear your thoughts on that.  Is there sort of a partisan push against their hearings?  Do you feel that their nominees have in any way kind of had it a little bit more difficult than President Obama's nominees when they first were coming in?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think there are a lot of explanations that people can consider for this broader phenomenon.  Certainly when you consider the way that Republicans in the Senate treated Obama nominees, the claim is laughable.

The President of the United States put forward the most experienced Supreme Court nominee in American history.  Merrick Garland had more experience on the federal bench than any other Supreme Court nominee since the dawn of our Republic.  He was recognized by Republicans as somebody who would be a consensus choice.  He was somebody that had a sterling legal career and somebody who served this country as a law enforcement official, including leading the investigation and prosecution of one of the worst terrorists in American history.  Republicans did not raise any sort of objection about his credentials, but they refused to even consider this nomination because he was appointed by a Democratic President.  It's outrageous.  Outrageous.

I noted yesterday -- maybe it was the day before -- the disparate treatment, shall we say, afforded by Chairman Chuck Grassley of the Judiciary Committee in terms of the way that President Obama's nominee to be Attorney General, Loretta Lynch, was handled, and the way that President Trump's nominee, Jeff Sessions, has been handled, despite having what I think just about everybody acknowledges is some controversy in his past.

So I think this is a very difficult case for the incoming administration to make.  But if they want to make it, they can.

Roberta.

Q    You talked about the trade enforcement.  I wanted to ask you about an environmental enforcement issue.  The EPA today said it's accusing Fiat Chrysler of excess diesel emissions, something that could come with a maximum fine of about $4.6 billion.  And the CEO today called this "absolute nonsense," in his words, and said the EPA was "grandstanding," said that the matter could have been settled or handled without such a public announcement.  I'm just wondering if you can talk a little bit about whether the White House signed off on what the EPA did today, why the EPA decided to make this announcement today, the importance of it.

MR. EARNEST:  What I can tell you is that enforcement decisions at the EPA are made by officials at the EPA, and I’m not aware of any White House involvement in this particular matter.  The President’s expectation is that officials at the EPA will fulfill their duty to enforce the laws and enforce regulations that are on the books, but how exactly they do that is up to enforcement officials at the EPA.

So for how this particular case was handled, I’d refer you to the EPA, but the President certainly does retain confidence in the important work that’s done by the EPA and retains confidence in their ability to effectively enforce the law.

Q    And the CEO said that the company plans to work with the incoming administration to put the matter behind them.  Do you think that it would appropriate for the incoming administration to deal with this kind of enforcement issue directly?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, with regard to how the incoming administration chooses to handle this matter, I’ll obviously defer to them.  But the respect that we have shown the enforcement process by ensuring that politics does not infect it is a tradition and precedent that we believe is worth upholding, and it’s one that we have rigorously upheld over the course of the last eight years and hopefully that will persist into the next administration.

Q    And lastly, did the President ask Director Clapper to call President-elect Trump last night?

MR. EARNEST:  He did not.  He did not.  I saw the statement from Director Clapper, but that call was not placed at the urging of the White House.  I can’t speak to what may have led to the phone call that occurred between the Director of National Intelligence and the President-elect last night.  You should check with Director Clapper’s office.

Michelle.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Have you talked to the President about the Donald Trump press conference yesterday?

MR. EARNEST:  I have not spoken to the President about the news conference yesterday.  As I have mentioned, I am sure that he has followed the extensive news coverage, but I’m not aware that he watched it in real time and I have not had a chance to talk to him about it.

Q    Okay.  And looking at an exchange like that, towards the start of the presser and the way the President-elect handled questions that were shouted out, what are your thoughts on that and how it bodes for moving forward?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the best way for me to answer that question is to talk about my own experience having worked in the White House Press Office for the last eight years.

As all of you know -- except maybe you, Vivian, but maybe everyone else knows and maybe you’ve heard -- there are ample occasions where I and some of my White House colleagues have not agreed with the way that certain journalists have chosen to ask questions of the President.  Sometimes we’ve been frustrated by the number of questions that are asked in one exchange.  Sometimes we’ve been frustrated that questions include either questionable or inaccurate premises.  In some cases, we’ve been frustrated that the line of questioning from a number of journalists has been focused on the same thing.  There are other occasions where I’ve expressed to journalists some frustration with their decision to interrupt the President as he’s giving his answer to try to press him more forcefully.  And there have even been occasions where the President himself has betrayed a little frustration about that.

But I think, even at those moments where our frustration has been most acute, I can never recall a scenario in which I was tempted to throw somebody out of the room.

Q    Never?

MR. EARNEST:  Um.  (Laughter.)  I can certainly say that that’s nothing that I ever threatened to do, even if the thought did cross my mind.

But, look, this is part of the process.  This is what it means to engage with the press corps.  And I think you’d be hard-pressed to make the case that many of the speakers -- because there was more than just one yesterday -- hard-pressed to make the case that they didn’t invite a little conflict and friction. There were some pretty tough, even outrageous claims that were made.  So it's not hard to see how that kind of environment is shaped by the people who organized the event.

But ultimately, this exchange of ideas is good for the country.  This questioning of people in authority by independent journalists is important to our democracy.  That's what we need to -- that's what ensures the health of our democracy.

And so it's important that -- I guess my point is I want to make sure that I don't say something in this context, even as I cite my own experience, that would dissuade the incoming administration from participating in this process.  It's good for the country.  And the President-elect himself indicated that he thought it was good for him -- at least it was in the context of the primaries.  So I hope that, recognizing that he felt like it was in his interest, hopefully he will recognize that it's also in the interest of the country for him to engage in those kinds of question-and-answer sessions.  So I hope he'll work with his staff to continue to do that.

Q    Going way beyond this one notable press conference, though -- I mean, there’s been this effort on the part of the Trump team to call entire news organizations purveyors of fake news from time to time.  I mean, sometimes those designations change, but that's been the case from the beginning of the campaign.  And now that phrase, “fake news,” seems to be part of their criticism after certain reports have aired, or whatever.  The President has had a lot to say about fake news lately and inaccuracies that are out there, but this seems to be like that designation is being turned on its head, that when certain elements are critical, now that's being labeled “fake news,” so it kind of muddies the line as to who’s calling what fake.

So what are your concerns about that?  I mean, do you feel like freedom of the press is going to be one of those things that can fall by the wayside?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I certainly hope not.  Our country benefits from a free and independent media holding those in power accountable.  There are not a lot of countries where that's exactly what happens.  In many countries, there’s not this -- well, first of all, in some countries, there isn't a free and independent media.  In other countries, there isn't the same tradition where there is -- tends to be a little friction between the press corps and those who are in positions of authority.  So the United States is relatively unique in having and fostering that kind of environment because we believe that it's good for the country.

And as I've mentioned before, the philosophy that I brought to this job is not to insist that all of you write stories or broadcast packages that make the President look good.  If that were my charge I would have gotten fired a long time ago because I failed miserably.  (Laughter.)  My charge has been to try to facilitate a relationship between the White House Press Corps and the White House that provides you with the information and access that you need to help the American people understand what we're doing and why we're doing it.

And the essence of that relationship will include some friction because the White House Press Corps, as you should, is always going to be demanding more -- more news conferences, more access, more transparency.  That's your job.  It's not your job to be satisfied; it's your job to be demanding more.  So there’s going to be some built-in friction.  And I've often said that if there’s a day that that friction doesn’t exist, it's an indication that somebody on one side or the other isn't doing their job.

So what I've tried to do is to make sure that we -- that even as that friction exists, that we not allow that friction to prevent either side from being able to effectively do their job. If so much friction builds up that you get so frustrated that nobody will return your call, that may mean you're less likely to call and get to the bottom of the story.  That's a natural human reaction.  So I certainly want to prevent that from happening.

On the other side, if the White House gets so frustrated with the coverage that they say, well, I'm just not going to engage with the press anymore, they engage in some kind of bunker mentality, well, that's not going to be good either and that's certainly not going to improve our coverage.

So trying to keep the friction at a low boil -- at the risk of mixing metaphors -- is the job of the person who stands behind this podium every day.  And that's what I've tried to do.  And the President believes that that actually -- like I said, if you have confidence in the arguments that you're making and you’ve got confidence that there are professionals in the audience that actually want to use their skills as a journalist to get to the bottom of what’s actually happening, you should have a lot of confidence about presenting your arguments.  Because if you present your arguments in an effective way and you're actually doing the right thing, then you're going to end up persuading a lot of people about the wisdom of your approach.

And I think the President’s strong approval ratings right now I think is an indication that we might be on to something.

Q    I guess to boil this down very simply, have you seen enough, or has the administration seen enough at this point to have real concerns about the way this new administration handles the press?  Are you disturbed by it?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think that there’s no doubt that there are a variety of substantive and stylistic differences between the incoming President and his team and the outgoing President and his team.  And they extend to a variety of areas.  They obviously have taken a different approach when it comes to dealing with the media.  But all I can do, I think at this point, is to make a case about the virtues of the strategies that we've employed.  But ultimately the incoming President and his team are going to implement strategies that they believe serves them and the country best.  And we'll have to see what they choose.

Toluse.

Q    Thanks.  Just to follow up on Michelle’s line of questioning -- the Turkish President, President Erdogan, basically backed up President-elect Trump in how he handled the CNN reporter’s questions yesterday, saying that he put him in his place.  I know the White House has had a long history of criticizing the Turkish government’s handling of the free press, so I’m wondering what your reaction is to the fact that Turkey seems to be happy with how President-elect Trump is handling the press so far.

MR. EARNEST:  I had not read about the Turkish President’s comment, but I’m not particularly surprised, given the treatment of journalists by the government in Turkey.

Turkey is a NATO ally, and the United States stands strongly with Turkey and works closely with Turkey to protect our mutual interests and also to protect the national security of Turkey.  We continue to do that, and the American people and the world benefits from that close relationship.  At the same time, that close relationship has not prevented us from speaking out and expressing our deeps concerns about the treatment of independent journalists in Turkey, who too often are imprisoned or silenced.

I recall that even when a senior Turkish official traveled to the United States, there was a physical altercation between that senior official’s security detail and Turkish journalists.  That obviously was not something that the United States was prepared to tolerate on our soil, and we spoke out against it and, as I recall, there were security officials from the United States that intervened.

I noted earlier, the United States and our tradition in this country and in our politics of having a robust, vigorous exchange between those in positions of authority and independent media is important, and we believe that that strengthens our democracy.  And if you have confidence in the arguments that you’re making, then you should have confidence in your ability to go and make that case to the press.  And if you don’t, it may not just raise questions about your strategy for dealing with the media, it may raise questions about the confidence you have in the arguments that you have to defend.

Q    I have a question about -- a couple of my colleagues had an interview with the Vice President earlier, and the Vice President said that he believes that some of the President-elect’s comments about the intelligence community, criticizing their actions so far, have already had a negative impact on our national security and have already helped Russia.  Does the President agree with that assessment?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I know that Director Clapper was asked about this before Congress last week, and he expressed his concern about the impact that some of the President-elect’s comments could have on the morale of the men and women of the intelligence community.  So I think Vice President Biden is expressing a concern that other leaders in the intelligence community have expressed.

The other thing that I’ll say about this is something that I’m confident that Vice President Biden agrees with me on, which is that the men and women of the United States intelligence community are professionals and they are patriots, and they set aside their own ideological and political views when they are focused on their task.  These are also individuals who are not likely to be cowed by criticism.

So I think -- I retain a lot of confidence that the men and women of the intelligence community are going to continue to do their job and do it as effectively as they ever have.  And they make a substantial contribution to our national security.  And President Obama has relied on them, the American people have relied on them to keep us safe over the last eight years, and we’re going to be counting on them as much as we ever have to do the important work that they do every day to keep us safe.

Q    Part of the interview -- part of the argument that the Vice President made in the interview was that, basically Russia is benefitting from sort of the chaos and the confusion over whether or not the intelligence community is correct or is right with their assessments, and he made the argument that the President-elect is fomenting some of that by questioning their values.  So does the President agree that Russia is benefitting from this chaos, from this lack of certainty and the lack of confidence in the intelligence community being propagated by the President-elect?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Toluse, there’s no doubt that before the election, the intelligence community issued a statement indicating their belief -- their conclusion that Russia was engaged in malicious cyber activity to try to undermine public confidence in our election system and in our democracy.  So that’s -- again, I think the Vice President is just giving voice to something that the intelligence community observed before the election that Russia believed that they would somehow benefit from undermining confidence in our democracy.

And that’s obviously something that this administration takes quite seriously.  That’s why the President ordered such a vigorous response to those Russian efforts.  That’s why the President ordered the -- or directed the intelligence community to compile this report and to brief it to him, to the President-elect, and to members of Congress, because all of them are going to have a role moving forward in ensuring that the United States is protected from our adversaries, particularly those that are willing to try to undermine our democracy.

Ron.

Q    In talking about the press conference yesterday, you said that some of the tough questioning was justified.  I think you were saying this because some of the claims that were being made by Mr. Trump and his attorney.  What were some of the more outrageous claims that were being made?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I’m not going to offer up my own commentary from here.  I’ll let other people make those kinds of observations about which particular comments they found to be particularly troubling, or offensive, or whatever else they may say.

I think the point that I’m making is that the kind of contentious environment that was in place at the news conference -- and I think that was pretty obvious to everybody who was watching -- was not one-sided.  I think it seemed pretty evident that the President-elect and his team felt like they were going to benefit from a pretty raucous environment in which some pretty strong charges were traded back and forth.

And, look, the kinds of engagements that we have sought with the press have been of a different tone and tenor, but ultimately the incoming President and his team will have to determine exactly how they want these kinds of interactions to go and what kind of relationship he wants to have with the White House Press Corps.

Q    I only brought it up because you said you’ve thought about it.  On the issue of -- you may have answered this yesterday -- but on the general question of Mr. Trump and his business and these possible conflicts of interest and so forth, and how he has made this arrangement to address that, in his view -- what is the President’s thinking about that?

And I know you’ve said in the past how they have different financial situations and he went overboard to put his few thousand dollars in the -- someplace in bonds, I think it was when -- but just generally, what is the President’s thinking about what Mr. Trump is doing, particularly given the concern that this could threaten -- that it could be something that could not just be embarrassing to him or threaten him but the country at large as a security issue?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, there are obviously oversight responsibilities that are housed at the Office of Government Ethics.  Congress has some important oversight responsibilities. There are important rules and regulations that are on the books. But what’s also important is the standard that’s set at the very top.  And that’s why the President -- why President Obama did undertake the extraordinary step of essentially liquidating all his assets, plowing them into treasuries.

And as I pointed out before, that wasn’t a smart financial decision because that coincided with a pretty dramatic reduction in interest rates, which hurt his return.  But ultimately, that was a good decision for the country because there was no question about whether or not he had a financial motive to make a particular decision.  He didn’t.  He was making a particular decision only because he believed it was in the best interest of the country, not because he had some ulterior financial motive, or there wasn’t even the appearance that he could have a potential ulterior motive.

That served the country well.  It took that question off the table.  It also sent a strong signal to other officials in the United States government about the kind of ethical standard that they should maintain.  This is a high standard that went above and beyond ethical regulations that were on the books.  And that’s why the President is extraordinarily proud of the fact that there hasn’t been a major scandal in his administration over eight years.

Q    Does the President think Mr. Trump should do more than he has in this area?

MR. EARNEST:  The President believes that Mr. Trump is going to make his own decisions about the most effective way to deal with this particular situation.

I would stipulate, as the President has on a number of occasions, that Mr. Trump’s financial situation, given his wealth, is more complicated than the situation that President Obama faced.  So I’m not suggesting that Mr. Trump has to do exactly the same thing that President Obama did.  I think a reasonable person would acknowledge that it’s going to have to be treated differently given the size of his wealth.  But I know that there are a number of people who are experts in this field

-- Democrats and Republicans -- who have expressed significant concern that the steps that were announced yesterday by the President-elect didn’t go nearly far enough to resolve these kinds of questions.

But for the response to this, we’re going to -- the American people are going to be relying on those agencies that have the responsibility of setting ethical standards, and we’re going to also be relying on the United States Congress to provide the kind of oversight that must be provided, and ultimately the President-elect is going to have to decide what kind of leadership he wants to show.

Q    Just one other thing.  The Senate moved last night about -- on the Affordable Care Act and beginning to repeal Obamacare.  What’s the -- well, you’ve had a lot to say about this, so I’m trying to just kind of get to the nub of it.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.

Q    Is this fight now over, or is there something still -- or do you --

MR. EARNEST:  I think it’s only just begun.  I was just looking -- because as somebody who has been doing this job for a couple of years, I’ve got an appreciation for people who are able to summarize a complex situation in a rather pithy phrase.  Sometimes I’m able to do that; sometimes I’m not.  But I can appreciate when somebody else does it well.  And I did happen to notice, thanks to the eagle eye of one member of our staff, a comment from Congressman MacArthur from New Jersey -- this is a conservative Republican, somebody that I've never had a chance to meet.  And when he was asked about the wisdom of the approach that Republicans were pursuing to repeal the Affordable Care Act and come up with a replacement at some indefinite point in the future, he put forward, I think, a rather apt metaphor.  I don’t have it in front of me unfortunately, but he said something like:  I want to know -- before we take action with this loaded gun, I want to know where it's pointed.

I think that is a pretty apt metaphor.  There are going to be very serious consequences for repealing the Affordable Care Act, as we've discussed in here extensively.  It's going to have life-and-death consequences for some people in this country.  And before the trigger is pulled, the United States Congress should be wise to understand exactly where it's pointed.  They should understand exactly what the consequences are going to be of them taking this action.  They should understand who's going to be hurt.  They should understand who’s standing in the line of fire.  Right now, there are 30 million Americans that are standing in the line of fire.  Because if Republicans repeal the Affordable Care Act, 30 million Americans are going to lose their health insurance.  130 million Americans, it was recently found, have a preexisting condition.  And if Republicans repeal the Affordable Care Act, those 130 million Americans are going to have protections stripped away that, thanks to the Affordable Care Act, prevent insurance companies from discriminating against them because of the preexisting conditions.  So the consequences are great for a great many number of Americans.

So I thought that was a pretty apt metaphor, with all compliments to Congressman MacArthur.  I don’t know if he'll consider it a compliment or not, but that's how I mean it.

There's one other statistic I thought that was interesting, and we can provide you some more details on this.  In 2014 -- this is according to a government study -- in 2014, 1.4 million marketplace consumers were either self-employed, small business owners, or both.  1.4 million Americans who purchased their health insurance through the marketplace.  So if those marketplaces go away, we're talking about small business owners who are going to be hurt.  We're talking about people who are self-employed, people who try to start their own business are going to be hurt.

And there was a study that was done about those states that have the highest share of small business owners who rely on marketplace coverage.  These are states that represented in the United States Congress by Republicans.  Idaho, Florida, Montana, Maine, and North Carolina have some of the highest share of small business owners who rely on the marketplace for health insurance coverage.  So the senators from those states I think are going to have some explaining to do, why they voted to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

But I guess, to go back to your original question, no, this isn’t over -- it's just beginning.

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  I want to ask you about the severe weather that seems to be plaguing many places in the West, in particular in California.  Is the President aware of the flooding situation there?  And has he been in contact, or has the White House been in contact with officials in the West to try to help mitigate the problem?

MR. EARNEST:  Yes -- this is a situation that the White House is following.  Obviously, our thoughts and prayers are with the families of those whose lives have been upended by the severe weather, not just in California, but throughout the West.  So this is something that we continue to watch closely.

Obviously, my colleagues at FEMA are the ones who are directly in touch with state and local first responders to make sure that they have the resources that they need.  We can check on what sort of White House communications there have been with state and local officials, but I'd refer you to my colleagues at FEMA who can give you a better account of what kinds of conversations they've had with officials at the local level who are responding to the situation and trying to meet the immediate needs of those Americans whose lives have been significantly affected by this dangerous winter storm.

Q    No disaster declarations as yet?

MR. EARNEST:  Not that I'm aware of, but we can certainly track -- we can track that for you.

Q    Thanks.  As far as the U.S. response to -- how do I put this -- there has been some concerns by many people watching the destabilizing of Eastern Europe for quite some time.  And as a response to that, and in an attempt to further secure the safety and security of many of our allies in that part of the world, the U.S. is now poised to put troops, I'm understanding, in Poland.  Can you give an update on that?  And what's the thinking behind making a decision like that, which will be seen as provocative by some, say, the Kremlin, for example?

MR. EARNEST:  So, Kevin, as you'll recall, when we were at the NATO Summit over the summer, in Poland, coincidentally enough, that this was an announcement that was made by our NATO allies to increase the deployment of military forces on NATO's eastern flank.  This included in the Baltics and in Poland.  And the United States, Canada, and a couple of other NATO members were deploying troops to NATO's eastern flank to shore up our defenses.

We made very clear from the beginning -- and let me repeat -- this deployment is defensive in nature; it is intended entirely to shore up our defenses along the eastern flank.  It is motivated, at least in part, by some of the destabilizing and even escalatory actions that the Russian military has undertaken over the last year or so.  We continue to be concerned about that.  So I think this does -- I know that the announcement about the deployment of U.S. troops is indicative of the depth of this administration's and this country's commitment to our NATO Alliance.

For the operational details about sort of the timing -- I know that some of these movements have already begun -- but for the number of troops and the equipment that's been deployed, or will be deployed, it's something that my colleagues at the Department of Defense can help you understand.

Q    Let me stay on that for just a second.  In terms of Russia, Vice President Biden made some interesting comments about the decrease in our nuclear stockpile while the Russians continue to not only maintain -- in fact, they're attempting to -- he didn’t say "grow," but they certainly have not decreased their stockpile.  I'm just curious, now that we're going to be going into a new administration, how concerned is the White House now, this administration, as it leaves that the posture, the American posture in terms of nuclear stockpile management -- decreases -- will change under a Trump administration -- potentially change?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I'll leave it to the next administration to describe what their plans are.  I certainly can help you understand what our approach has been, and our approach has been -- you know, you'll recall that early in this administration, in 2010, Congress -- the Senate did ratify the New START Treaty that did make commitments to the -- that did put into force commitments that were made by the United States and Russia to reduce our nuclear stockpiles.  And that obviously was an important step to promote the security not just of the United States and Russia, but of countries all around the world.

Q    Are they living up to it?

MR. EARNEST:  I'll refer you to the State Department for an updated assessment of exactly what they have done.  We have been pleased with some of the steps that they have taken.  We have been concerned with some of the other steps that they have taken.  But for a detailed accounting of how all that washes out, I'd refer you to the State Department.

But what the United States has done is preserved our ability, beyond any doubt, to protect the United States and to protect the American people.  That's not going to change, and we continue to be confident of that.  In fact, President Obama has proposed a significant investment in modernizing our arsenal of nuclear weapons to ensure that they remain modernized, effective, to minimize the risk of any mistakes or accidents, and to ensure that that arsenal is in place to protect the American people.

But the stockpile reduction that the Vice President discussed yesterday would enhance our national security.  It is consistent with the way that we have tried to implement a policy to ensure that the United States of America is protected even as we make some reasonable steps -- take some reasonable steps to reduce the risk of proliferation, reduce the risk of an accident or disaster, and reduce the cost to taxpayers.  As we reduce the stockpile, we can reduce the resources that are necessary to protect it, to modernize it.  This would also be in the category of ensuring that we are efficiently and effectively using taxpayer dollars.

Q    Even if the Russians don't follow suit and reduce their stockpile?

THE PRESIDENT:  Well, what we have seen, we have seen some steps that were taken by Russia to reduce their stockpile.  There are some other steps they’ve taken that we haven't been particularly happy with.  But we continue to be focused on ensuring that all the necessary steps are taken to protect the United States of America.  That's been true over the last eight years, and that will be true until the President’s last day in office.

Q    And last one.  Has the United States ever engaged in malicious cyber activity in an attempt to undermine the leadership of another country?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, I don't have any covert cyber operations to talk about from here.  That may not be surprising to you.  But --

Q    Because you mentioned that Russia did, and our intelligence officials say they did.  The pushback I've read is, well, the U.S. does it, too.  And so because we're not privy to that information I'm always curious how we can look at someone else and say, well, they’re doing this and they’re doing that, when, in fact -- or at least in principle -- we certainly might be doing something similar.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me just say as a general matter with regard to Russia’s activity in the context of the 2016 election, it is not accurate to say that the United States did it first.  What I can tell you is something that the President himself has said, which is the United States retains significant offensive cyber capabilities.  Those offensive cyber capabilities are much stronger than the capabilities that are retained by any other country.  And the work to ensure that we maintain that edge continues.

But what’s also true is, given the advanced nature of our economy, and given the way that our economy and our way of life is quite dependent on the Internet and being able to remain connected, the United States is also vulnerable in this realm in a way that a lot of other countries aren't, which makes this a particularly thorny policy situation that the next administration is going to have to deal with.  Of course, this administration has been very forceful not just in developing our offensive capabilities but also in strengthening and refining our defensive capabilities.

And unfortunately, we've not gotten the support from the Congress that we would like to further invest in those defensive capabilities.  And maybe the Republicans in Congress will be more receptive to those kinds of arguments that are made by a Republican President -- because the fact is the country has been hurt by the failure of Republicans in Congress to act on the specific recommendations that we put forward with regard to enhancing our cybersecurity.

Margaret.

Q    Vice President Biden told reporters earlier today that he was surprised that those unverified claims regarding the President-elect and Russia were brought to his level and the attention of the President.  Did President Obama also have that reaction?  Was he surprised that it reached his desk?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven't spoken to the President about that.  I know that there is a reference to this in the statement that Director Clapper issued last night, but he obviously has a longer leash when it comes to discussing classified information or information that has been presented in classified form to senior officials, including the President.  I just don't have quite that latitude.

So with regard to the decision about what to include in an intelligence briefing that's presented to the President of the United States, that's certainly something that Director Clapper can speak to.

Q    You started off talking about China and then a trade option that was taken.  Was that coordinated with the incoming administration, this decision to go to the WTO?  And the detailed factsheet put out underscores how much this dumping of metals has hurt American workers.  Is there any sense of regret in the administration not having acted earlier, given the amount of angst and rhetoric there’s been about American workers not being defended enough by this administration, at least on the campaign trail?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think when you consider the entirety of the record that I laid out at the beginning, I think there is no legitimate argument to be made about the forceful efforts that we've undertaken to protect the American people and protect the American economy from unfair trade practices originating anywhere around the world, but particularly in China.  That is something that we have made a priority, and the American people and our economy have benefitted from it.

With regard to the timing of this announcement, I would just note that there were, as I mentioned, numerous bilateral efforts by the Obama administration to persuade China to take strong steps to address the excess capacity in the aluminum sector.  So that would explain the timing, which is, we tried to work this out before we went and filed the case at the WTO.

But we haven't shown any hesitation about filing cases with the WTO.  The United States, under President Obama’s leadership, has filed more cases at the WTO than any other country in the world.  And all of the cases that have been decided have been decided -- that we have filed are cases that we've won.  So that, I think, should be an indication of just how rigorous a process we pursue in protecting the American people, in protecting the American economy, and, most importantly, protecting American workers.

I think it would probably be an overstatement to suggest that we coordinated this announcement with the incoming administration, but I'm sure that they were informed one way or another this step as we were taking it.

Q    As recently I think as September, President Obama brought this up with Xi when he was in China.

MR. EARNEST:  That's correct.

Q    So you're saying the President's own personal attempts to persuade Chinese leadership failed?  That's what led to this decision to file a complaint?

MR. EARNEST:  I think what you can assume is that these kinds of matters are important enough to President Obama that he doesn’t hesitate to raise them at the highest levels of the Chinese government.  And when we don’t see the kind of response that we would like to see, on the timeline that we would like to see it, then we don’t hesitate to go to the World Trade Organization and hold them accountable for their actions.  And thus far, when we've done that, we haven’t lost a case.

Q    Lastly, you also had a number of announcements from the State Department, from Treasury, and then from the NSC here in regard to Syria touting the first actions against Syrian officials for using chemical weapons.  Why did it take so long, given that your own releases acknowledged that there were attacks in 2013 and every year since the initial U.S.-recognized attack that nearly led to U.S. military action?  Why now?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, first of all, I think it's important to understand that this was obviously not the only response.  The United States did succeed in 2014, in working closely with Russia, to persuade the Assad regime to declare the existence of their chemical weapons stockpile, to cooperate with an international effort to secure those weapons and destroy them.  And that, obviously, is a step that didn’t just enhance the security of the people in Syria who were facing the brunt of these chemical attacks, but it also reduced -- it eliminated the risk that any of those weapons would fall into the hands of terrorists who might use them other places.

So we obviously were pleased about the impact of that step.  What we have been concerned about since has been the willingness of the Assad regime to weaponized otherwise legitimate industrial compounds, like chlorine, and use them to wreak havoc, attack, wound, and kill innocent people, innocent Syrians.  And so that's why, again, you've seen the forceful response both in terms of the priority we placed in rounding up and destroying their declared chemical weapons stockpile, but also in terms of holding accountable, at least through financial sanctions, those who were involved in producing these weapons and carrying out these attacks.

There have also been international efforts that have been supported by the United States to have a broader international investigation into war crimes about the use of these kinds of tactics and the use of these kinds of weapons.  So I think you have seen -- I know you have seen a robust response from the United States with regard to the use of chemical weapons that is commensurate with the national security interests that this question raises for the United States of America.

Q    But the administration has called out the use of weaponized chemicals for years now, post that agreement that you reference -- in fact, in violation, you've also said, of that agreement in many ways, at least in principle.  So why now sanction if these are well-recognized attacks?  At least from a unilateral position, these sanctions could have happened much earlier.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, with regard to the precise timing for these individuals, when they were put forward, I'd refer you to the Treasury Department, because obviously they have to do the forensic work to determine exactly the most effective way to implement these kinds of penalties.  This obviously stems from the intensive investigations that they do in the financial sector.  They obviously work closely with the intelligence community to develop these options.  But it does indicate another element of our forceful response on this matter.

Q    So would it be wrong to assume that the U.S. attempts at diplomatic efforts with the Assad regime via Russia, and the long, drawn-out, ultimately fruitless process is actually what caused the administration to pause before acting?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I think you'd have to ask the Treasury Department for the precise timing.  I think what is true is that Russia has failed time and time again to get their client-state in line.  They have refused to stand up to them.  They refused to persuade them.  And I don’t know if that's because they are unwilling to make a forceful case, or they're unable to get the weakened Assad regime, their only client-state in the Middle East, to listen to them.  And that's been a subject of disappointment, and there have been a lot of lives lost as a result of Russia's failure on that score.  But for why exactly that happened, I guess you could consult with the Russians.

Andrew.

Q    The Justice Department inspector general is going to investigate FBI actions before the election with regard the probe into Hillary Clinton's email server.  Is that something that has been supported or sanctioned by the White House?  And what questions do you think remain open about the FBI's behavior regarding this?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, decisions that are made by inspectors general across the administration are independent.  And this administration has assiduously protected the independence of inspectors general, so we wouldn’t weigh in publicly or privately on any sort of investigative decision that's made by an inspector general.  Presumably, the stakes are even higher for an inspector general who has a responsibility for conducting these kinds of investigations of independent law enforcement agencies.

So I can tell you that the White House was not involved in that decision.  And anything the inspector general chooses to investigate is something that he will do -- he or she will do based on their view of the situation, based on their own knowledge of the facts.  And hopefully they will follow the evidence where it leads, if they find any evidence.

Q    And a Chinese aircraft carrier into Taiwanese not exactly territorial waters, but the Air Identification Zone -- I wondered if you had a reaction to that, if the U.S. government stepped in in any way to kind of defuse that situation.

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have a formal U.S. government response to that matter to share with you.  We can see if there was any sort of reciprocal action or response from the U.S. with regard to that specific operation that was carried out by the Chinese navy.

What I can tell you is we have long encouraged both sides to look for ways to prevent tensions from escalating, and we believe that -- look, one of the goals of our one-China policy is to prevent tensions from escalating, both because we don’t want tensions about that matter to interfere with our ability to work with China on a range of areas where we can make progress together, but also because obviously we value our interactions with the Taiwanese, including with regard to our trading relationship with them.

But for a more specific response to this Chinese military operation, I'd refer you to the Department of Defense.

Q    Okay.  And you referenced the one-China policy.  Do you -- are you drawing a line between what Trump did with regard to the telephone call and what the Chinese are doing?

MR. EARNEST:  I think what I'm just trying to do is to restate the policy that we have pursued, and the reason for it.  And there are a variety of reasons for it, but one of them is that we believe it's in the interest of the United States for tensions in that region of the world to not escalate, particularly between China and Taiwan.  And the effective implementation of the one-China policy has been largely successful on that score.  But obviously the incoming administration will have to make up their own mind about how and whether to pursue their relationship with China and with Taiwan.

Bill.

Q    Josh, it's been reported that Chelsea Manning is on the President's short list for commutation or pardon.  Can you confirm that?

MR. EARNEST:  I can't.  I've seen those reports, of course.  There is a well-established process for individuals to seek clemency from the President of the United States.  That is a process that has been organized by the Department of Justice who will review those petitions for clemency.  But I don’t have any comment on any of the petitions that have been submitted thus far.  I can't even confirm the existence of a petition or rely on those who are filing the petitions to indicate whether or not they filed them.  And this applies not just to people like Chelsea Manning, but also applies to people like Governor Rod Blagojevich whose representatives have made clear that he would like some clemency from the President of the United States.  But I just don’t have any comment on those potential applications.

Q    There is an organized set process, correct.  There's also a limited amount of time before the President can act.  It was rumored that he might make those announcements yesterday.  Can you give us any idea when we could expect them?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't have any update on timing of any potential clemency announcements.

Q    This week?

MR. EARNEST:  I just don't have any update on that.

John.

Q    The Congressional Progressive Caucus has written a letter to President Obama, signed by 40 other Democrats, imploring the President to take bold action to follow up on his campaign promise to close Guantanamo.  And the main point was that they didn't want to give President-elect Trump another tool to place detainees in the future.  Is the President going to be able to respond in a manner that the CPC is going to look upon favorably?

MR. EARNEST:  I have not seen the letter from the CPC.  I can tell you that the President has obviously made the closing of the prison at Guantanamo Bay a top priority.  There's a reason that he announced his proposal to close the prison on his, I believe, it was his first or second full day in office.  So the President has made this a priority, and there are a number of reforms with regard to national security that we have successfully implemented, including in the use of torture.

But with regard to closing the prison at Guantanamo Bay, we've encountered significant obstacles from Congress -- Democrats and Republicans, disappointingly.  And what the President has pursued is an effort to responsibly review the case files of every detainee.  Those case files were reviewed by representatives from six different national security agencies.  A large number of those detainees were approved for transfer to other countries under a set of specific security requirements that would limit their ability to strengthen the United States once they were transferred.

By implementing that process, we have succeeded in dramatically reducing the population at Guantanamo Bay.  It's down in the mid-50s I believe, last time I checked.  And if there are additional transfers to tell you about, we'll certainly make those -- if there are additional transfers, we will tell you about them.  We always announce them publicly.  But the President believes that this is in the best interest of the country, both because there are significant taxpayer dollars that are expended to maintain the prison there.  It's inefficient to maintain that facility.  And we're spending too much money to house those detainees when you consider that they could be housed at a much lower cost in the United States and would not endanger the American people.

We also know -- and this is something that military officials have also concluded, national security experts in both parties have concluded -- that we know that terrorist organizations are using the continuing operation of the prison at Guantanamo Bay as a recruiting tool.  And I think that's an indication of an unwise policy, to put it mildly.  So that's why the President has made a forceful case.  Unfortunately, we've run into far too many obstacles in Congress, but we've made a lot of progress in getting the population of the prison at Guantanamo Bay down to a much smaller level.

Q    Does the President share concerns with the CPC that he's leaving a tool out there for Donald Trump to use and that they'll just reverse the progress?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, we certainly have been concerned by some of the rhetoric that we heard during the campaign about the potential that the incoming President would fill it up, I think he colorfully described the prison there.  That obviously is inconsistent with the policy that we have implemented.  The Obama administration has never transferred somebody to the prison at Guantanamo Bay.  We have been able to rely upon the strength of our criminal justice system to detain, prosecute, and put away terrorists that threaten the United States.  We have not had to rely on the prison at Guantanamo Bay to do that.  So I think the President's record, when it comes to implementing a foreign policy that keeps us safe and is consistent with our values, is quite strong and one that the next administration will be challenged to live up to.

Q    Two quick, lighter questions.  Our cameras caught the President over on the steps of the EEOB shaking hands with staff.  Could you tell us what was happening there?  Was he just thanking them for their service?

MR. EARNEST:  I believe -- and we can double-check this -- that the President was greeting and taking a picture with members of the United States Digital Service.  You'll recall that one of the President's initiatives was actually to recruit some of the best talent from Silicon Valley.  These were individuals who have a particular expertise when it comes to technology.  And many of them, after working in Silicon Valley, determined that they wanted to pursue a career in public service.  So they have been, in some cases, volunteering their time to go work at government agencies and help improve what government agencies do to protect their networks from malicious cyber activity; to make their communication with the public more seamless and more effective; to help them refine the decisions that they're making with regard to procuring IT technology -- or IT equipment to enhance their systems.

There's a lot of work that can be done to improve the way the government uses technology to be more effective and to keep us safe.  And so the President has got a soft spot for the men and women who have signed up for that service.  Many of them are individuals who could be making a whole lot more money in the private sector, but because of their commitment to this country and their patriotism, they're serving this country in the United States Digital Service.  And the President is grateful to them for their work, and the work that they have done has made a genuine impact on the American people and on the way the federal government serves the people.

Q    You also said the President will take the First Lady someplace warm after they leave office next Friday.  I was just looking ahead on the 10-day forecast and some of the hot spots that the President has gone to lately -- or frequently, actually.  (Laughter.)  And in Honolulu, it's going to be in the mid-70s, but chance of rain --

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah.

Q    -- probably not ideal, right?  (Laughter.)  Palm Springs, kind of in the low 60s -- it's 65 degrees here today.  So weather can be unpredictable.  (Laughter.)  Do you have any more to say about where the President might go when he leaves office?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't at this point.  I admire your investigative journalism, though.  (Laughter.)  That was excellent work.  The President is looking forward to getting out of town, and hopefully the weather will cooperate, regardless of where they go.

Q    Ginger Zee has nothing to worry about.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  John, in the back.

Q    Back to the Justice IG review.  What do you make that Justice is saying they decided to do this review at the behest of multiple not just ranking members, Democrats, but Republican chairmen around the election?  We heard a lot about, it's just sour grapes, it's inconsequential, not going to affect the election -- or it didn't affect the election.  What do you make of Republicans wanting this review?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I can't speak to the conversations that the Inspector General has had with members of Congress, so I'll let the Inspector General speak for himself or herself with regard to why they chose to pursue this investigation.

Q    And last week you mentioned, as far as who is the leader of the Democratic Party next Friday at around 12:01 p.m., you said it might be by committee.  You and I are probably familiar with the old saying, if you have two or three quarterbacks, you don't even have one.  So when the President gets back from destination to be determined on his vacation, and he's concerned or has advice, who is that one person he calls?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I think it is the nature of the Democratic Party that it functions most effectively when it's energized from the ground up and when you have leaders in the Democratic Party who are responsive to the grassroots, to Democrats who aren't in elected positions in communities all across the country.  It is true that the President in power is the nominal head of his party, and when he's not, there are other people who have to step up and take leadership positions.  So I certainly would anticipate that people like Chuck Schumer and Nancy Pelosi will play a leading role.  I know that Governor McAuliffe in the Commonwealth of Virginia plays a leading role in working with Democratic governors across the country, and I certainly would expect him to continue to be a leading voice among Democrats.

But what the President has also said is that his departure from the national stage will create an opening for others who we may not have heard of at this point to step up and to make their voices heard.  I've often compared, particularly to some of our younger staff, the situation that the Democratic Party is in right now to the situation that the Democratic Party faced in 2001.  That was also a situation in which a Democratic President was leaving office under circumstances that Democrats across the country were deeply disappointed by, to put it mildly.  And you also had the Republican control of Capitol Hill, and there were questions being raised about who was going to lead the Democratic Party at that point.

And with the exception of some people who lived in the 312 area code, I don't think there was anybody that had ever heard of Barack Obama.  But seven years later, he was elected President of the United States.  So he was obviously somebody that -- I think there are plenty of reasons to, even looking back, to think about some of the possibilities, had Vice President Gore won that election, but it's hard to imagine a scenario that Barack Obama would be President right now, had Al Gore won that election.

So his departure from the national stage, as sad and disappointing as it was at the time, did create an opening for new voices.  And one of those voices belongs to Barack Obama, who later had a profound impact on our country and certainly on the Democratic Party.  So it will be quite interesting to see, and I'll certainly be watching to see what kinds of men and women choose to step up and take advantage of this opportunity.

Jared.

Q    Josh, while you’re staring into the abyss, earlier you mentioned the Affordable Care Act repeal and you said --

MR. EARNEST:  Not quite that dark yet, man.

Q    Darkest timeline.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  (Laughter.)  If you had asked me in November, I might not have said anything, but --

Q    You said earlier that repeal -- this is only just begun.  And while that is meticulously and technically accurate, it’s also a little ominous.  What can the administration do at this point other than cajole?  It’s like the President had a pen and a phone, and now he’s just going to have a phone.  What can he do at this point to influence this process?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, he’ll be using his pen to write a book that hopefully you’ll buy at some point.  (Laughter.)

But more seriously, the reference that I made to Ron -- I appreciate you giving me the opportunity to clarify this.  What has just begun is the effort by Democrats to protect the Affordable Care Act.  That’s what’s just begun.  And the fact that Republicans were able to pass that budget resolution by the slimmest of margins when you consider that Joe Biden is still the Vice President of the United States.  And so they’ll enhance their margin by one once Mike Pence is sworn in as the President of the Senate, as Vice President.

So there’s not much margin for error for Republicans, and when you look at the public statements of Republicans who are quite uneasy, including Congressman MacArthur, who I cited earlier, that’s why I think you see a lot of confidence on the part of the President and other Democrats about our ability to make a very forceful case that Republicans shouldn’t repeal the health care of 30 million Americans; that Republicans shouldn’t take away the kinds of consumer protections that ensure people have access to free check-ups and the ability to include their kids on their health insurance until they’re age 26; that ensure that policies that extend the health and life of the Medicare Trust Fund are preserved; that ensure that senior continue to enjoy the hundreds of dollars a year that they get that make their prescription drugs more affordable.  These are all good benefits that are at risk when Republicans say they’re going to repeal the Affordable Care Act without putting forward a replacement.  So the work to protect the Affordable Care Act has only just begun.

Q    On a separate topic, the Office of Government Ethics rules say that executive branch employees -- and forgive me for reading this here -- may not use government positions to suggest that the agency or any part of the executive branch endorses an organization, products, service, or person.  Is it appropriate for the President-elect to tweet that someone should buy LL Bean products, particularly given that the person involved is a super PAC donor for the President-elect?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, it certainly raises questions, and I think you alluded to a couple of them, even in the context of the one question that you asked.

I do think that this brings to the fore the need for ethics officials in Congress to conduct the important oversight work that they’re charged with conducting.  Obviously, all of you as journalists and as agents of the American people, and defenders of transparency, and advocates for accountability, all of you have a role in this as well.  But I’m not going to pass judgement on an individual tweet from the President-elect.  I’ll let his team explain what he was trying to convey and why it doesn’t run afoul of the ethical regulations that you’ve just cited.

Q    I haven’t -- I don’t recall the President doing anything like that in the last eight years.  Has he -- would he do something like that?  Would President Obama do something like that?

MR. EARNEST:  I certainly don’t recall the President doing something like that.  I do recall a situation in which the President was photographed wearing a particular company’s jacket on the Great Wall of China, and that company, seeking to capitalize on the publicity, put up a billboard in Times Square, I believe.  And rather than endorse the product, the White House contacted the company and asked them to remove that billboard.  So it’s apparent that we’ve taken a different approach with regard to the President’s endorsement of outerwear.  (Laughter.)

JC, you had your hand up.  I’ll give you the last one.

Q    Sure.  I’m sure we appreciates the appellations you just gave us -- defender of transparency, et cetera.  It’s quite remarkable, thank you.

You also mentioned earlier some of the frustrations you've had with members of the press corps.  You did not act on them, no one went out the door -- not when I was here.  Can you just reflect on a few of the positive moments that you've had in this room?  And also, if I may, just -- and do you think these press briefings should continue on a daily basis?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I do think that the press briefings should continue on a daily basis.  As I mentioned earlier, I believe that they serve the American people very well.  The President believes that engaging in these briefings serves his administration well.  It gives us an opportunity to make a forceful argument in favor of the policies that he’s advanced.  And again, if you have confidence in the arguments that you’re making, then you’re not going to have any hesitation to make those arguments to people who are trying to understand exactly what the best thing to do is.

So I believe that these kinds of engagements are valuable, the President does too.  But ultimately, the incoming administration will have to decide what the best course of action is.  At the same time, I wouldn’t say that these kinds of engagements are perfect, so I’m not suggesting that there shouldn’t be any changes made.  But protecting the core nature of these regular engagements, where all of you have an opportunity to demand accountability and demand transparency and demand answers to legitimate questions about what the President is doing and why he’s doing it, I think is an entirely fair process and it’s a process that’s good for our country.  So hopefully it’s one that will continue.

Q    And will you hold off until next week your highlights that you might want to share with us?

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah, maybe I’ll try to come up with some between now and -- (laughter) -- I’m just kidding.  I’m just kidding.

Thanks, guys.  I will be back tomorrow.  I’ll see you then.

Q    Question quickly -- there’s a story out there about an incident involving a White House guest and a dog fight -- Sunny -- apparently earlier this week.  Anything?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t seen anything on this, but we can take a look at it for you.

Thanks, guys.

1:53 P.M. EST
12:20 P.M. EST

MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Nice to see you.  I do not have any comments at the top, so we can go straight to your questions.

Josh, do you want to start?

Q    Sure.  Thanks, Josh.  I wanted to start with the collapse of the ceasefire in Aleppo that was intended to allow these final civilians and fighters to evacuate.  It seems like this deal was essentially brokered by the Turks and the Russians without a whole lot of direct U.S. involvement.  So I'm wondering at this point whether -- if you could tell us what kind of engagement the U.S. is involved in in trying to ameliorate the violence there or secure the evacuation of the people who are still trapped there.

MR. EARNEST:  Josh, for years, the United States has played a leading role in trying to facilitate a diplomatic solution to the situation in Syria, including the situation in Aleppo.  And our goal all along has been to reduce the violence and create space for sustained humanitarian assistance to be provided, particularly to those communities that have been under siege by the Syrian military, aided and abetted by the Russians and the Iranians.

So the United States continues to play that leading role even today.  And I know that there were discussions at the U.N. Security Council, and the United States continues to push for a diplomatic agreement.  We certainly encourage other countries to be involved as well, and we've made clear that our efforts to reach a bilateral agreement with the Russians, which is something that we tried for many weeks earlier this year, is not something that we could achieve because the Russians couldn’t hold up their end of the bargain.  And I know they've got all kinds of explanations for why that may be the case.  Most of them are rooted in the fact that they are either unable or unwilling to control their client government.

Q    But as far as right now, hour by hour there's pummeling of Aleppo, even when there's supposed to be this ceasefire.  I mean, is there any new push or specific engagement by the U.S. to try to restore the ceasefire?

MR. EARNEST:  There is continued engagement, and there has been for years, and it continues to this moment.  And we continue to be deeply concerned about the situation in Aleppo.  We are seeing the same reports that you are -- that innocent people are being slaughtered in the streets at the hands of the Assad regime, aided and abetted by the Russians and the Iranians.  And it raises deep concerns, and it's a deeply tragic situation.  And these atrocities have to come to an end.  And we're working diligently through a variety of diplomatic channels to bring about that end state.

Q    There seems to be some disagreement now, even within the intelligence community, about whether the evidence that's been turned up supports an assessment that Russia was actually trying to influence the election in a way to help Donald Trump.  Can you tell us -- I know you have limitations about what you can talk about -- but whether the President has been informed by his Director of National Intelligence that they do not concur or embrace what the CIA has concluded about that?

MR. EARNEST:  When it comes to CIA conclusions or intelligence community conclusions, I'm going to refer you to the intelligence community.  And there's a variety of reasons for that.  The first is that we work hard to make sure that we are insulating the intelligence community from the suggestion that they are subject to political influence.  It's important that the President be in a position to get good information.  And when I say good information, I mean timely, accurate information about situations all around the world.  And I certainly don’t want to do anything or say anything from here that could cast doubt about the integrity of the information that's being provided to the President of the United States.

So when they have an assessment to offer, I'll let them offer up that assessment.  What they have said, and what they've said before the election, is that Russia was engaged in malicious cyber activity in an attempt to erode confidence in our system of government.  And that's deeply troubling and very serious.  And that's why the President ordered the Department of Homeland Security to work with elections administrators across the country to protect those systems and to bolster their ability to withstand intrusions from Russia so we could ensure the accurate counting of ballots, and we could ensure that everybody who was eligible to cast a ballot could do so.

And the intelligence community has reported that on Election Day they did not see the kind of increase in malicious Russian cyber activity that would call into question the casting or counting of ballots.  That certainly is good news.  But there is rampant evidence of other tactics that were used by the Russians to erode public confidence in our democracy.  And that's deeply troubling, and that's why the President has ordered a review, and the intelligence community is working on that review, and the President's expectation is that review will be delivered before the President leaves office, before January 20th.  And we're certainly going to endeavor to release as much information as possible from the review to the public as we can, knowing that there will be some things that we can't release because we need to protect the ability of the intelligence community to collect this information.

Q    Given that the mixed signals about this is sort of fueling a politicization of the intelligence work, certainly with the President-elect, and given that you've said that this review that's taking place is basically the primary distinguishing factor between that and the assessments that had already been done, is that it's looking back into previous elections and sort of doing this holistic thing -- has the President indicated that he would like the intelligence community to perhaps release additional information or maybe clear what exactly they think happened sooner than later, perhaps sooner than that culmination of that review, which doesn’t seem like it will happen until perhaps as the President is headed out the door?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have a timeframe.  The President certainly believes that as much information can -- the President believes that the intelligence community should release as much information as they can to the public about this issue, given how serious it is, given that we're talking about the integrity of a national election.  So the President certainly does support that just on principle.  But I don’t have an updated timeframe to share in terms of what the intelligence community may or may not be able to do.

Q    And then just quickly, Reince Priebus has been out today talking about mixing it up a bit here at the White House as far as how the press corps interacts with the White House, and possibly doing away with assigned seating here in the Brady Press Briefing Room.  And so I just wanted to clarify for everyone, could you tell us whether your office has any say or control over the seating assignments here in the briefing room?

MR. EARNEST:  We do not.  This is -- I believe this was -- it certainly predates President Obama's presence in the White House.  The White House Press Corps has worked among yourselves to organize the seating arrangements in this room, and I certainly would recommend to the incoming administration that they collect and familiarize themselves with some basic facts as they consider what sort of policies to implement moving forward.

Roberta.

Q    A senior Chinese official warned today in China Daily that the Chinese government is ready to penalize a U.S. automaker for price fixing, and I’m wondering what notice the U.S. government has been given about this and what concerns the White House has, if any, about this.

MR. EARNEST:  Roberta, I’ve seen those reports.  I don’t have a lot of other information that I can share.  We’re still trying to collect additional information about those specific reports.

I think what I can say definitely is that the Obama administration has a strong track record of making sure that we are protecting the rights and interests of U.S. businesses around the world, including in China.  And as we learn more information about this particular situation, the United States government will continue to be protective of our interests in that circumstance and in other circumstances around the world.

Q    Do you see this as a response to the President-elect’s sort of tough rhetoric on Chinese policy?

     MR. EARNEST:  Unclear.  I can’t speak to why China may or may not have made this decision.  Again, I think it’s unclear exactly what the decision is.  And until we can figure out what exactly that decision is, it makes it hard to consider exactly what their motive may have been.

Q    Okay.  And taking a step back just from the decision, whatever it may be, I guess how concerned in general is this White House, this administration, that there could be economic repercussions for U.S. companies because of the stepped-up rhetoric against Chinese policies?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think this goes to an argument that I have put forward when I was previously asked about this issue.  The longstanding U.S. commitment to a one-China policy, this is a policy that’s governed by a piece of legislation and three different communiqués that were signed into law by Democratic -- or were signed -- by Democratic and Republican Presidents.  This is a policy that has been observed for 40 years or so.  And China considers their relationship with Taiwan to be a highly sensitive issue, and signaling potential changes in that policy is going to have widespread ramifications for the United States, both as it relates to our economy and as it relates to our national security.

So certainly the incoming administration has an opportunity to consider what sort of policy they believe is in the best interest of the United States.  I think the suggestion that all Americans would have is that they consider those kinds of choices very carefully before acting.

And in this case, the President-elect indicated in an interview over the weekend that he took the call based on an hour or two’s notice.  And I think this is one illustration of how important the role of the presidency is and how important discipline and careful consideration of one’s words and actions is when you’re President of the United States and responsible for advancing our interests around the globe.  So I’ll leave it there.

Michelle.

Q    We heard the retired NATO commander talk about the situation in Syria, and though he had served under Obama, he said that Obama would probably look back on that situation with deep sorrow and some shame.  What do you think of those words that he said?

MR. EARNEST:  I didn’t see those comments.  I can tell you that, under President Obama’s leadership, the United States has been at the front of the effort to find a diplomatic solution to the situation in Syria.  The United States has provided more humanitarian assistance through bilateral channels than any other country in the world.  We have provided $6 billion in relief.  And the United States has mobilized the international community to respond to the threat that is posed by ISIL, which essentially is a consequence of the chaos inside of Syria.

So President Obama has been making smart, strategic decisions that protect carefully U.S. interests in the region and around the world.  That said, I think every American and every human being is deeply troubled by the violence and innocent loss of life that we see inside of Syria.  It's heartbreaking.  It's tragic when you see a government commit atrocities against its own people using the military might of the state.  That is a failed government.  That is a failed state.  And President Obama has been leading the international effort to address it, both by trying to find a diplomatic solution to the chaos, but also dealing militarily and otherwise with the extremist threat that is propagated by that kind of chaos.

Q    I don't think anyone disputes the efforts.  But for a very long time now, those efforts have failed.  So is there no other alternative?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, let's be clear.  You got a briefing for a long time from the President's Special Envoy to the Counter-ISIL Coalition that documented the success that we've had in rolling back ISIL and reducing their capacity to harm the United States or our interests, either in the region or around the world.  So I would vigorously dispute that characterization of our efforts against ISIL.

With regard to making the kind of progress that we'd like to see toward a diplomatic solution inside of Syria, we haven't seen as much progress as we would like.  And there are innocent Syrian men, women and children that have died as a result of it.  And ultimately, that cause is the willingness of the Assad regime to use the military might of the state against his own people, and the willingness of the Russians to intervene on his behalf to prop him up, even though they themselves claim that they're concerned about that chaos fueling extremism that could have consequences back in their home country.

They should be concerned about that.  And for years, the Russians have failed to reconcile a basic contradiction in their strategy.  They say, on the one hand, that they're interested in trying to fight extremism and bring the violence to an end in Syria, even at the same time that they prop up the failed government there that exacerbates the violence and makes the diplomatic solution even harder to reach.

There's one good example of this -- there are some reports -- reports I can't confirm, I have to start out by saying -- but I think are illustrative of what Russia has done.  Russia, nine months ago, touted publically their success in taking back the Syrian community of Palmyra from ISIL terrorists.  Well, we have learned that ISIL has retaken that city from the Syrians and the Russians.  In doing so, they didn't just succeed in driving out the Syrian government and the Russians; ISIL now has their hands on a significant anti-aircraft missile system.  This is according to reports so I can't confirm it.  But it does illustrate, if true, the grave danger associated with Russia's failed strategy.

Their strategy, if they're actually interested in fighting terrorists, should not involve an anti-aircraft missile system because ISIL doesn't have an air force.  So what that anti-aircraft missile system was doing in Palmyra is something that only the Syrians and the Russians can explain, but it does underscore the grave risk that Russia is taking by dedicating their resources to attacking innocent civilians in Aleppo and propping up the Assad regime, and taking their eye off the ball when it comes to ISIL.

In this case, their miscalculation was so grave that it’s not just a matter of them ignoring the ISIL threat.  The ISIL threat today -- again, if these reports are true -- is worse because of the failed strategy of the Syrians and the Russians.  And that's something that only they can account for.

Q    When we use words in here repeatedly like “atrocities” -- I mean, you just said today that innocent people are being slaughtered in the streets -- it just seems like you're saying that -- have we gotten to a point now that there really aren’t any red lines anymore?  Like, it’s as if it’s gotten to a point so many people have been killed, and now because of social media and other means, Americans are watching this happen, and many people thinking humanity as a whole should be better than this.  So at what point do nations say, okay, something needs to be done now?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the Assad regime has demonstrated that they've crossed all the lines in pursuit of their goals.  And those goals apparently include depraved tactics like trying to starve innocent civilians into submission, bombing hospitals and playgrounds, targeting them.  These tactics are depraved.  They do cross just about every line that I can think of.  And, frankly, they cross lines I hadn’t previously thought of.

The idea that you would target a playground and bomb kids, hoping that you would then convince people to give up because you had killed their kids --  what kind of a sick mind comes up with a strategy like that?  And what kind of civilized country is going to support those tactics?  But that's what Russia has done.

Q    So for the families that we actually hear begging for international help, what do you say to those families today?

MR. EARNEST:  The United States is playing a leading role in providing financial assistance.  The United States is playing a leading role in trying to negotiate a kind of cessation of hostilities what would allow for the provision of humanitarian assistance.  The United States is playing a leading role in trying to facilitate a conversation about resolving the political situation inside of Syria so we can bring the violence to an end, and we can put new leadership in Syria that actually reflects the will of the Syrian people.  And in that chaos, that's what the United States is doing.

What we're also doing is engaging militarily to protect the international community and the American people from the threat that is posed by ISIL.  And we've made a lot of important progress against it.  But we have not accomplished our goal so far.

Dave.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Has the President spoken with Labor Secretary Perez about the DNC chairmanship?

MR. EARNEST:  Dave, I’ve seen some of the reports about Mr. Perez’s interest in that position.  I can't confirm them.  And I don't have any additional conversations between the President and his Labor Secretary to tell you about at this point.

What I can tell you is something that I’ve said before which is that Democrats across the country have an important decision to make about who will assume the role of leading the national Democratic Party.  And I would expect there will be a vigorous campaign.  I know that there are already three or four candidates that are in the race.  But I don't know if Mr. Perez intends to be one of them.

Q    The President over the years has obviously valued Secretary Perez’s leadership in the administration.  Does he think he’d be good at the DNC chairmanship?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, it’s certainly true that President Obama thinks very highly of Secretary Perez.  He is somebody who has served at the Department of Labor for three or four years now.  And he has been instrumental in advancing some of the executive actions that President Obama has prioritized.

At the Department of Labor, they've worked to implement the overtime rule to ensure that the hardest-working Americans are getting paid fairly and even getting a raise.  Under Secretary Perez’s leadership, the Department of Labor has implemented the conflict of interest rule that prevents large financial institutions from not acting in the best interest of their clients, and we know that some of those practices cost working people billions of dollars every year.

We're trying to bring that to an end, and we've made progress in doing so because of the leadership and effectiveness of Secretary Perez.  He’s somebody who hasn’t just effectively led that department, he also is somebody who is a forceful and persuasive advocate for the values that animate the policies that he has implemented.

So he’s a very effective guy.  The President thinks highly of him.  But as I've said before, I don't anticipate a situation in which the President forcefully endorses a candidate in the DNC chair’s race simply because the President’s view is there are rules and regulations that sort of lay out how the DNC chair should be elected when there’s not a Democrat in the White House.  And the President believes that that process, which involves Democrats all across the country at a variety of levels, engaging in that debate is healthy for the party over the longer term.

Q    Do you have any knowledge whether the Vice President’s office might have been encouraging him to get involved?

MR. EARNEST:  I can't speak to any conversations that Secretary Perez may have had with Vice President Biden, but you can check with his office.

Q    One other issue.  Governor Brown from California yesterday wrote to the President asking for him to ban all new offshore drilling in the state.  And there are reports also that the administration might be ready to ban offshore drilling in the future in the Atlantic.  Can you let us in on plans for either ocean?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven't seen the letter, but let me see if we can get you a substantive response to your question.

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  I want to ask you about comments coming up today by Secretary Jewel.  This is according to reporting out of Reuters, my colleagues down the row here.  "Scientists must confront climate change deniers and speak up if President-elect Donald Trump tries to sideline climate research."  Is that the President’s position that scientists should speak up if they disagree with the President-elect?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the President’s view is that policymaking should be guided by science and that policymakers should be listening to scientists, both inside the government and outside the government.  That's the President’s view and that's certainly the way that he has chosen to run his administration over the last eight years.  If the incoming administration determines that they want to base their policy on something other than science, it looks like they’re going to get at least four years to try that out and we'll have an opportunity to see how it works.

Q    Do you believe that it's appropriate for Secretary Jewel to sort of weigh in in this respect before she’s actually heard from the President-elect officially on the job?  She seems to be making the suggestion that his administration will somehow ignore that which the scientists -- whether it be the EPA or the Interior -- have already established.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I think based on some of the comments that we've seen from the people that the incoming administration or the President-elect has chosen to serve in important positions like the EPA and the Department of Energy, I think the concerns that people across the country and around the globe have expressed about the incoming administration’s commitment to focusing and continuing the fight on climate change I think are legitimate questions at this point.

Q    What can you tell me about the "Investing in a Safer, Strong Baltimore: A Model for the President's Approach to Working with Cities" report?

MR. EARNEST:  Let me take a look at the report.  I don't know that I've seen it, but we can certainly take a look into it.

Q    Okay.  Last, I want to get the very latest on the Gitmo numbers.  I typically ask you about this time -- is there a plan to transfer more?  What’s the latest tally and/or is the President expected to make another round of transfers between now and when he leaves office?  And should we expect him to also comment on this as we hear from him later in the week?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I wouldn't rule out additional transfers between now and January 20th.  There is a process that is in place that was instituted by this administration where the case files of individual detainees are considered by six different national security agencies.  And based on the view of those agencies, individuals can be cleared for transfer under certain security restrictions that would limit their ability to menace the United States or our interests around the world.

Once those individuals are cleared for transfer, then the State Department does the delicate work of asking countries around the world to assume the responsibility of taking on these detainees and imposing the security restrictions.  And that work is continuing.  I don't have any transfers to preview, but every time a detainee is transferred, we make a public announcement about it.  And that will also be true between now and January 20th.

Q    Is it also true that the United States pays these countries to receive these detainees, these transferees?  And what’s that number like, and who tracks that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I can tell you is that the United States works closely with these other countries to ensure that there are security restrictions in place.  I can't speak to all of the negotiations that go into it, but certainly in some cases, we're talking about countries that benefit from the assistance of the United States and making sure that those security restrictions are effectively implemented.  And that's consistent with the mandate of these agencies that review the case files to ensure that restrictions are put in place to prevent these individuals from posing an undue risk to the United States of America.

Q    Last, I'd like to get your sort of expanded comments on something Ben Rhodes talked about, and that is the continued relations between the United States and Cuba, and the importance moving forward.  What is the President's message?  And will he reach out directly to the President-elect about the importance of maintaining that relationship and some of the pitfalls that come along with that, given their lack of human rights and other concerns that many people around this country have?

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah.  Well, listen, Kevin, we've got concerns about the human rights situation in a lot of countries around the world, including some countries like China and Russia that we've already spent a lot of time talking about today.  The question really is, how do we shape those relationships so the United States benefits from them?  How can we shape those relationships so that we can put pressure on those countries to improve the human rights situation inside their country while at the same time giving the American people the opportunity and our country the opportunity to benefit from those relationships?

So when it comes to Cuba, the United States had had a policy in place for more than five decades that attempted to isolate Cuba in an effort to pressure them to improve their respect for human rights.  That policy failed.  That policy was in place for more than 50 years and it didn't have the desired outcome.  So President Obama decided to try something new.

And in just two years since the President decided to try a new approach that would seek to normalize relations between our two countries, we've made a lot of important progress.  More than $6 billion in trade has been initiated between Cuba and the United States since then, which obviously has an important economic benefit here in the United States.  More Cuban Americans are able to send more money and travel more frequently to Cuba to visit their family members who remain in that country.  Other Americans who are interested in visiting Cuba for cultural or educational reasons can have the benefit of learning more about the island and essentially deepening relations between our two countries.  Those Americans are also allowed to bring back as much Cuban rum and Cuban cigars as they'd like for their own personal use.  So there are a variety of benefits, you might say, that the American people can enjoy as a result of this policy change.

Just as importantly, the Cuban people are benefitting too.  And we're seeing the Cuban economy -- particularly when it comes to entrepreneurs in that country -- benefit from more interactions with Americans who are traveling to their country.

Q    But would that lead to a change in their human rights posture at all?  I mean, because on the one hand you said, listen, the old policy didn't work as far as human rights were concerned.  Now this new policy seems to be working perhaps economically, certainly for them, and I think, from a social perspective, perhaps even for the American and Cuban relations.  But is that changing the paradigm on human rights?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, it certainly is ramping up pressure on the Cuban regime.  And earlier this year, many of you had the opportunity to travel to Cuba with the President where the Cuban President was asked directly and put in the international spotlight around a question about whether or not his government takes political prisoners.

That’s increasing pressure on the Cuban government in a way that, frankly, they’re not used to seeing.  That was a rather remarkable, extraordinary event, those of you who saw it may recall.  There were two different times in which an aide came onstage to whisper in the ear of the Cuban President about how best to answer this question because they understood they were facing more public pressure than ever before about their respect for human rights; certainly more pressure than they faced when they were under an embargo for more than 50 years.  And that pressure was only existent -- only existed because of the President’s trip down there and his commitment to the pursuit of this approach.

I think the last thing is, if we’re actually interested in trying to protect and advance the interests of the Cuban people, if we actually care about their plight, then we might consider what their view is of the policy.  And all the public data that I’ve seen is that, in some cases, more than 90 percent of Cubans actually believe that this policy has been good for them.

So this is a policy that has only been in place for two years, and the President is hopeful that as this policy remains in place, we’ll have more benefits to show from it.  But of course, the next incoming President will have something to say about that.

Margaret.

MR. EARNEST:  Josh, U.N. Ambassador Samantha Power had some strong words, some strong rhetoric, about Syria and Russia in particular, and I want to ask if you agree with one particular thing she said.  She said, "Aleppo is joining Rwanda and Srebrenica as defining historical events that embody evil."  Is that how the White House views what’s happening right now in Aleppo -- comparing it to those two genocidal mass atrocities?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, this actually is an area of expertise for Ambassador Power.  She’s written award-winning books on this topic, so I certainly wouldn’t be in a position to disagree with her.

The kinds of atrocities that we’ve seen in Aleppo, as I mentioned earlier, seem to cross every line, including some lines that I think many of us had never even contemplated before.  The willingness of the Assad regime, backed by the Russians and the Iranians, to engage in depraved tactics targeting innocent civilians is beyond the pale.

And it certainly does -- the kind of chaos and violence and bloodshed and innocent loss of life that we’ve seen in Aleppo certainly does, tragically, distinguish it from so many other countries in the world -- and so many other cities in the world, I should say.

Q    But using those two specific examples, they are very concrete examples that are now widely recognized as genocidal acts where the world community failed to prevent mass atrocity, and American presidents have, in past, then said, I regret not doing something then.

So it’s a powerful comparison to make, and I’m just wondering, how does President Obama think about this?  I mean, is he sitting there saying -- and putting it in the same category as Srebrenica, and putting it in the same category as Rwanda?  And how does he feel?  I mean, does he regret that this is happening on his watch?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, as I mentioned in response to the earlier question, President Obama is deeply troubled by the innocent loss of life that we’ve seen in Aleppo and all across Syria.  There’s no denying that.  That’s why the President has played a leading role in the international community to try to bring that violence to an end.  That’s why we’ve been deeply engaged from the beginning in trying to find a way to bring this violence to an end, to negotiate the kind of political solution that’s the only kind of solution that can solve this problem.  A military solution cannot be imposed on this situation, unless of course somebody is suggesting that somehow the United States of America, on the orders of the Commander-in-Chief, should deploy 100,000, 150,000 -- 200,000 U.S. servicemen and women to essentially occupy Syria.  I don’t know --

Q    Iran and Russia do believe there is a military solution and they are seeing their version of a military solution play out on the ground in Aleppo.

MR. EARNEST:  At the same time that Bashar al-Assad does an interview today saying that the violence is going to continue.

Q    Right.  So not end the war, but certainly advantage the side that you want to win.  But putting that aside, just talking about the atrocities -- not the rest of it -- President Obama did something really extraordinary when he came to office in saying that atrocities prevention is a national security priority.  He was the first President to do that.  You are now saying as an administration these two prime examples of ethnic cleansing, of genocidal acts are happening right now.  And the action stops at rhetoric.  How does the President process that?

MR. EARNEST:  Again, I stridently disagree with the suggestion that the action stops at rhetoric.  There’s no basis.

Q    But there were actions taken elsewhere, right?  And President Clinton came out and said, I regret not doing something in Rwanda.

MR. EARNEST:  Margaret, my point is --

Q    There weren't actions taken in the Balkans.  So it’s not as --

MR. EARNEST:  When you say actions, you're using some shorthand for military action.  If that's the case, then we should -- but you cut me off from trying to offer up why that's not a wise solution.  So there is --

Q    No one was advocating for invasion.  I never said that, that that was the example you were doing.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay, but you're suggesting why isn’t there any action on the part of the Obama administration.  And the case that I have made repeatedly so often that you guys can repeat this:  President Obama has played a leading role in the international community in trying to find a diplomatic solution to this situation.

You all have covered it.  You all have traveled frequently to locations throughout Europe where Secretary Kerry has met repeatedly with the Russians and other countries in the region to try to find a solution to this situation.  Those meetings occurred because the United States is playing a leading role in bringing people to the table to try to negotiate this solution.

The United States is the largest donor of bilateral humanitarian assistance to try to meet the needs of the people who are suffering.  The United States is in a position where we are taking military action to try to prevent the chaos that President Assad is causing in his country from fueling the kind of extremism that could pose a threat to the United States and our allies and our interests not just in the region, but around the world.  All of those things are happening on President Obama’s orders, as a result of his leadership, and they're the kinds of things that only a U.S. President can do given our influence around the world.

So that is what the United States is doing.  I readily acknowledge that we are not seeing the results that we would like to see in addressing the violence inside of Aleppo.  But it’s offensive to suggest that somehow the United States government and the world is not doing anything, particularly when no one has put forward an alternative suggestion for what we should now be doing.

Ron.

Q    I think the issue, Josh, is that people will acknowledge all that the United States has been doing -- humanitarian aid, so on and so forth, diplomacy -- but we are still at a place where the awfulness is still happening.

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah.  And I --

Q    And that's why the question becomes, okay, so the U.S. has done all that -- now what?  Which is why yesterday Brett McGurk was saying the humanitarian, the civil war part of Syria was only addressed briefly in that meeting.  Is that correct?  It wasn’t -- most of the meeting was about the ISIS part of this, ISIL part of it.

MR. EARNEST:  That's correct.

Q    And the Syrian civil war atrocities part of it was just brief.  And I guess the question is -- the President just doesn't see anything more that the U.S. can do now to stop what’s happening now despite all that you've done, all that he’s done over the past number of years?  There’s just nothing else?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I --

Q    Again, I know -- I hear you.  But again, there's nothing new, nothing different, nothing that he thinks -- it’s just a problem that can't be solved, or a situation that can't be ameliorated?

MR. EARNEST:  I'm not aware of anybody in the U.S. government who has given up trying to continue to play the leading role in finding a solution here.  The diplomacy continues.  And you can go talk to my colleagues at the State Department about all of the conversations and all of the work that is underway there.

And the reason for that is not just because Secretary Kerry finds those conversations particularly enjoyable; I'm sure that he doesn't.  But they are the only path to resolving the situation that exists.  If there's another one, by all means, please send it up and we'll make sure that it gets a careful look, because even our harshest critics cannot articulate some sort of alternative for what is happening right now.

And, again, if they think that the most powerful thing that we should do is to deploy the United States military and occupy the country, they should do so.  They should explain how that's going to reduce the violence.  That certainly is not our experience.  They should explain how that is in the interest of U.S. taxpayers because that's going to be expensive.  They should explain to our United States military why they should put themselves at risk in that way.  And they should explain how that is part of a long-term strategy to protect our interests in the region.  Because what we have found is when the United States engages in a ground war and tries to occupy a country in the Middle East, there are long-term negative consequences for doing that, including the situation in Syria right now.

Q    And there's nothing short of a full-scale invasion?  That, I guess, is what most people would just ask.  I mean, we've heard -- we understand all that.  And I also understand how you feel that your critics always say that if you're not doing something militarily, you're not doing anything.  And I get that.  But just talking to people -- there's nothing short of a full-scale invasion.  And there was talk of safe zones.  And during the campaign, Hillary Clinton, others, some of the allies in the region -- the Turks at one point -- were talking about that.  I guess it's just hard for people to see the slaughter continue and there's not something else that can be done militarily that would, in the short term at least, stop some of the bloodshed.

MR. EARNEST:  Let me try to answer your question this way.  I suspect if there actually were a military solution to this problem, depending on what it was, the Commander-in-Chief wouldn't hesitate to implement it.  But there's not.  And this is not a new position that is being articulated by the Obama administration.  This is a position that we have had since the earliest days of the civil war in Syria.  There is not a military solution that can be imposed by the United States.  Diplomacy is the avenue.  Diplomacy is the path toward a long-term resolution that is in the interest of the United States.  And that's what we're pursuing.  And, in fact, that's what we're leading.

Q    It's the hesitancy that I think a lot of the critics point to -- this caution that is, yes, part of President Obama's approach to this -- approach to many things.  And we've heard him argue how he has not hesitated in certain circumstances to deploy the military to do things in different places.  I guess this is a question for him on Friday when he -- because, again, given what's happening, I guess we'd love to get a better sense of how he processes this.  And I understand it's a tremendous responsibility, but how he processes the criticism, the concern that the world has about this situation at the same time that there's this criticism of him for being too cautious, too -- dare I say -- weak to do more.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don't think you should use that word because people certainly didn't think it was cautious when the President of the United States ordered the Seal Team Six into Pakistan to go and take Osama bin Laden off the battlefield.  I don't think people thought it was cautious that the President has built an international coalition of 68 members to go and take the fight to ISIL.  And you just got a long briefing yesterday, a timely one, that reveals the progress that we've made in rolling back territory from ISIL and taking their external plotters off the battlefield and limiting their ability to organize those kinds of operations and carry them out against the United States and our allies around the world.

So I think the President has been judicious and strategic, but he’s also been bold.  And the United States and our national security has benefitted from it.

Gardiner.

Q    Why did it take until October 7th to attribute the hack to the Russian government when the hack on the DNC was confirmed in April, and from the first days investigators knew it had Russian ties?  That delay covered most of the presidential election, causing months’ worth of debilitating coverage of the leaks that were not properly informed by a formal government statement that this was an act of foreign espionage.  Wasn’t that a mistake to take so long?

MR. EARNEST:  Gardiner, this is an assessment that was put forward by the intelligence community, and the intelligence community put forward this statement as soon as they were able to confirm a couple of things.  First, they had to confirm across 17 different government agencies that they had high confidence that this is exactly what had transpired.

Now, I recognize that there was this independent, private analysis that had been put forward, but the standards of the intelligence community, for good reason, are very high.

Second, the intelligence community wanted to be as specific as possible in putting forward that assessment so that people could have confidence in the facts.  In order to be specific, the intelligence community also had to ensure they would not be revealing the kinds of sources and methods that give them the insight that they need to conduct these investigations.  So there was a determined effort to both be as specific as possible while also protecting the sources and methods that are used by the intelligence community to conduct these investigations.

I think all in all, Gardiner, this was a statement that was put out a month before the election.  So I would acknowledge that there were reports of hacks and leaks before that, but what also existed before that were private assessments about how that material was obtained.  And there’s no denying that those materials were stolen property.  The suggestion -- there is no denial on the part of the U.S. government that somehow the DNC had not been hacked.  So even as news organizations were reporting on this information, they were reporting on information that they know had been stolen and leaked.

Those are editorial decisions that are made by independent news organizations, but even the excellent report that was included in your newspaper today about this incident makes clear that news organizations in the United States essentially became the arms of Russian intelligence.

Q    But shouldn’t those news organizations have been told months earlier?  I mean, Josh, this is a new battlefield, and you're telling me that the U.S. government cannot respond on this battlefield for months, six months, until much of the damage as a result of this attack has already occurred?  You're saying that it was appropriate to wait between April and October to allow the Russians to have their goals and aims achieved largely, and it wasn’t until pretty much the last minute of the election that the U.S. government came out with something that might have changed news organizations decision-making about using this information?  Why not do it before?  And shouldn’t you -- if you are not capable because of this wide-ranging review, shouldn’t you change that review process?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't think there’s any evidence to indicate that editorial decisions changed as a result of the statement.  So I think we actually do have an opportunity to evaluate that claim.  So I think it actually is an open question about whether it would have made a difference.  It didn’t make a difference when we put out the statement a month before the election in the way that this was handled by news organizations.

But here’s the other thing, Gardiner, and I think this is important, as well, as you consider the government response, and in particular the White House response to this situation.  It would have been inappropriate for White House figures, including the President of the United States, to be rushing the intelligence community to expedite their analysis of the situation because we were concerned about the negative impact it was having on the President’s preferred candidate in the presidential election.  That would have been all the more damaging in an environment in which you have the Republican nominee, without evidence, suggesting that the election is rigged.

So what we were deeply concerned about from the beginning was making sure that we were protecting the integrity of the intelligence community and insulating the intelligence community from the kind of political pressure that was obvious to everybody who was reading the newspapers or watching television.  It's important for our intelligence community to be shielded from that kind of political interference or political influence.  We need --

Q    It's just that he has -- that he’s sort of paralyzed and can allow the Russians sort of open-field running as long as they attack in a way that the President himself feels awkward about intervening -- right?  I mean, this was a Russian effort on the most important electoral process in the United States.  And you're saying that the President himself had difficulty responding simply because of the politics of responding?

MR. EARNEST:  No, I’m not ascribing any difficulty here.  I’m merely stating the facts, which is that the President believed it was important for the intelligence community to formulate in advance of the election, if possible, the most definitive analysis that they could make public.  And that's what they did -- a month before the election.

Unfortunately, that didn't seem to change the way that this was considered or reported on by the media.  So again, I think that's why it’s difficult to say that maybe it would have been treated differently if the report had come out two or three or four months earlier, because it’s not clear that when the report did come out that it had much of an impact on the way that it was -- in the way that this material was reported on.

I also think this all underscores the risk of politicizing the intelligence community.  There is a reason that when the review that the President has ordered is released in January will have some integrity.  It will have that integrity because the President has gone to great lengths to protect the intelligence community from even the appearance of being used as a political weapon.

And that has long-term consequences for the decisions that future presidents -- plural -- will make.  They need to be able to count on the information that they're getting from the intelligence community being right and not being influenced by -- and by "right" I mean timely and accurate -- and not being influenced by partisan politics.

Q    Is that the reason for the very differential response between what the President did after the North Korean Sony hack, in which he very forcefully and personally came out and addressed that, and this hack?  Which it’s a strange thing because this hack so clearly had far graver consequences and was so much more important to the country than the Sony hack, which he very publicly and forcefully came out and denounced.

So help me understand why those two very different responses by the President personally, and why he didn't respond to this one in the forceful personal way he did to the Sony one.  Was it because of politics?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think there are two things at play here.  The first is that the North Korea attack was, in many ways, more crude.  And the President's statement in December of 2014 was also based on an intelligence assessment.  So the statements that we have made as an administration have been driven by the facts and have been driven by the assessment of the intelligence community.  And the intelligence community assessment with regard to the Sony hack was arrived at sooner.

Q    And was more clear?  Or is that --

MR. EARNEST:  Well, you'd have to talk to them, I think, about how they reached these conclusions.  But in both -- in all cases, our administration is commenting on this based on the facts and based on the impartial, unbiased assessment of the United States intelligence community.  And the American people benefit from having an intelligence community that isn't subject to partisan politics, even in the midst of the most hotly contested, divisive election in recent history.

But you raised a second question, which is sort of about the President's personal involvement.  And the President did believe, given that he had endorsed a candidate in the political -- given that the President had endorsed a candidate in the presidential race, he believed it was important for the intelligence community to make this announcement.  And that's why you saw a statement from -- a joint statement from the IC and from the Department of Homeland Security.  Again, that was an effort to ensure that this information avoided even the appearance of being politically motivated.

And the President had very strong feelings about the race and about the candidates who are involved in the race.  And the President did not -- those of you who traveled with the President in the last four or five weeks of the campaign saw that the President didn't pull any punches in forcefully making an argument in support of his preferred candidate.  And he believed that that political activity should be separate from the intelligence community's analysis of Russian malicious cyber activity.

Now, what's also true -- and this goes to something that we discussed in the briefing on Monday -- there's ample evidence that was known long before the election and, in most cases, long before October about the Trump campaign and Russia -- everything from the Republican nominee himself calling on Russia to hack his opponent.  It might be an indication that he was obviously aware and concluded, based on whatever facts or sources he had available to him, that Russia was involved, and their involvement was having a negative impact on his opponent's campaign.  That's why he was encouraging them to keep doing it.  You had the Republican nominee refer to the President of Russia as a strong leader.  The Republican nominee chose a campaign chair that had extensive, lucrative, personal financial ties to the Kremlin.  And it was obvious to those who were covering the race that the hack-and-leak strategy that had been operationalized was not being equally applied to the two parties and to the two campaigns.  There was one side that was bearing the brunt of that strategy and another side that was clearly benefitting from it.

Now, I know there's a lot of reporting that there may be some disagreement in the intelligence community about whether or not that was the intent.  That's a question that they should ask and a question that they may attempt to answer, but there certainly was no doubt about the effect.  And, again, it didn't require a security clearance or a consensus, high-confidence intelligence assessment to understand.  And in spite of all that, that didn't change the way in which this information was reported on, either.

Q    Josh, we've talked before here about this administration's retaliation or potential retaliation for these efforts.  And we quoted a lot of experts in our story saying that basically you're making a mistake; that you didn't -- you haven't apparently retaliated against this attack and you continue to sort of say that any retaliation could be secret.  They are saying that, first of all, you should have retaliated long before now and probably before the election, and that it shouldn't be a secret retaliation -- it should be very clear that the United States is retaliating against this to discourage this continued behavior.

So help me -- if you don't mind, defend the administration's decision-making on both not apparently retaliating so far, not retaliating before the election as a means of discouraging this continued behavior, and not guaranteeing that this retaliation would becoming public, which, again, according to these experts, would help discourage this behavior then and in the future.

MR. EARNEST:  Gardiner, what we have indicated is the President believes that based on what we know about what Russia did, that it merits a proportional response.  From here, I'm not in a position to confirm whether or not that response has been initiated or not.  I'm also not in a position to confirm that we won’t ever in the future discuss what that response is or what that response may be.  There may eventually be a point at which we do discuss what the response is, will be, or has been.

Just trying to cover all my verb tenses there.  (Laughter.)

But here’s a couple of other things that are important to consider.  Given the interconnected nature of our society and our economy, the United States is in the unique position vis-à-vis the rest of the world because we rely on 21st century communications technology for just about everything in a way that lots of other societies and economies and countries don't.  So --

Q    Are we particularly vulnerable?

MR. EARNEST:  We are -- the United States is particularly vulnerable.  Now, that is counterbalanced by the fact that the United States is also more powerful when it comes to our cyber capabilities than any other country in the world.  That's compounded -- the complexity of that situation is compounded by the fact that so much of this is new.  When we're talking about international conflicts on the battlefield or in the open seas, there are decades and, in some cases, even centuries-long traditions and norms and treaties and understandings that have been negotiated and observed.  And it sets up a framework for countries being able to avoid disagreements about what’s appropriate behavior.  And when those disagreements do arise, there is a codified system for resolving them.

None of that exists in cyberspace.  And, in fact, the President has made this one of his top policy priorities is to begin to initiate a process in our discussions at the G20, in our discussions at the G7, and in our bilateral relations with other countries that have significant cyber capabilities to start to establish those rules of the road.

And if you go back and look at some of the G20 communiqués, you can see that there is a specific -- I know that's something you've probably already done, Gardiner, knowing how conscientious you are about covering these issues.  So just to refresh your memory about how specific some of those efforts were in the context of the world’s 20 largest economies, you’ll also recall -- and this got more attention, understandably so -- when President Xi of China came to the White House for a state visit last fall, the fall of 2015, it was notable that he stood in the Rose Garden of the White House next to the United States President indicating his country’s commitment to a norm in cyberspace that countries should not support cyber-enabled theft for commercial gain.

And that is a norm that the United States had been previously concerned China was not willing to observe.  I can't offer an updated assessment on how well they are observing that norm that the Chinese President stated.  But it certainly addressed many of the concerns that had been justifiably raised by U.S. companies about how China was hacking their businesses, and then using proprietary technology and information to disadvantage U.S. businesses and to give Chinese businesses a leg up.

So establishing those norms in cyberspace is a priority.  I just described an economic situation that has significant economic consequences for the country, but this also applies in the national security and homeland security realm, as well.

So I think that would explain a lot of this.  Look, I guess there’s one other -- you asked a lot of questions, so that’s why I’m giving a long answer.

Q    I’ve got one more, by the way.

MR. EARNEST:  Which is -- I welcome the opportunity to have this discussion, so I’m just trying to remember everything I wanted to say.

There’s one last thing that I did want to say, which is one of the highest priorities that was identified by the President and his policy team in the fall, given the threat that was posed by Russian malicious cyber activity, was ensuring that the elections infrastructure of the United States was protected.

Now, the thing that we acknowledged from the very first time that I was asked about this is that there are some built-in protections based on how diffuse the elections infrastructure is in this country.  Cities, states, counties all have a role in administering elections.  They use different systems for conducting those elections.  That means that there’s not one way to hack the entire election system of the United States.  That makes our elections process complicated and messy and difficult to reform and improve.  It also makes it harder to hack.

Q    So hanging chads are a good thing?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t know if I’d go quite that far, but relying on paper ballots or hanging chads makes it hard for somebody who’s sitting in a cubicle in Moscow to have an impact on the outcome, at least by tampering with the ballots.  But the same goes to voter registration rules.

Now, the concerning thing, Gardiner, was that we had detected some Russian malicious cyber activity on the systems of some elections administrators across the country, and this is where politics gets involved again.  In most states, the people who are in charge of administering elections are themselves politicians.  They’re not impartial observers.  They have an impartial mandate to ensure the conduct of a free and fair election, and the vast majority of them do that job and do it well.  But if there was a perception that the Democratic President of the United States was raising some of these concerns about Russian malicious cyber activity because he was trying to protect the Democratic candidate for President, there is not likely to be a lot of cooperation between a Republican elections official and a Democratic administration.

So this administration went to great lengths -- we even went to Capitol Hill -- to try to convince Democratic and Republican leaders on Capitol Hill to signal their commitment to setting aside partisan politics and focusing on the national security of the country, and issuing a joint public statement about how important it was for election administrators in both parties to work with the Democratic administration to protect their systems from Russian intrusion.

Democrats in Congress readily agreed this was a good idea.  Leader McConnell and Speaker Ryan did not readily agree to it.  I’m not going to get into all of our private conversations, but this was an element of the story that was published in your newspaper today.  And it’s true, we didn’t get the kind of prompt cooperation we would have liked.

Now, we eventually did get a letter that the four leaders of Congress did agree to send to the organization that represents elections administrators across the country.  And as a result, there were not a lot of charges and counter-charges that the Democratic administration was up to no good.  And, in fact, experts at the Department of Homeland Security worked with elections administrators in 45, 46, 47 states to ensure that their systems were protected from Russian intrusions.  And the good news is that the intelligence community was watching closely, and they determined -- or at least they did not observe an increase in malicious Russian cyber activity on Election Day that interfered with the casting or counting of ballots.  And that obviously is good news.  But that's not the whole question.

Q    One more.  Sorry to take so long.  The GSA has released a letter stating that the Trump organization will be in violation of its lease on the Trump hotel site here in Washington the minute that President-elect Trump takes office if he doesn’t fully divest himself of his holdings in the hotel, which he has shown no sign that he is doing.  Was that appropriate for the GSA to do?  And what responsibility does this administration have in ensuring that the incoming Trump administration abides by conflict of interest laws and the emoluments clause of the Constitution?  Is this something you're working on in the transition?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I'm not aware that there’s a robust role for this administration to play in this.  I'd refer you to the GSA to explain the concerns that they raised about the contract that they have with the Trump organization.  The relevant agency here is going to be the Office of Government Ethics.  This is a nonpartisan, independent agency that is charged with ensuring that government officials -- federal government officials are abiding by all of the rules and restrictions that apply to the ethical conduct of people who are supposed to be serving the national interest.

So I think the proper role here is going to be with the Office of Government Ethics, with inspectors general who have independent oversight responsibilities in the executive branch.  There’s also going to be a critically important role for Congress.  And the early indications, I think, leave me cautiously optimistic that Democrats and Republicans are prepared to play that oversight role to ensure that those who are entrusted with protecting and advancing the public interest are not compromised by their own personal financial considerations.

     Obviously, President Obama has gone to great lengths to prevent even the appearance of having a personal financial conflict.  President Obama sold all his stock and all of his outside interests before entering the Oval Office, and tied all that money into Treasury bonds.  Given the aggressive way in which the Federal Reserve was reducing the interest rate, that was a very poor investment decision, but it was the right thing for the country.  And that's kind of the point.

John.

Q    Thanks a lot, Josh.  Russia has figured prominently in a number of questions that you’ve received this week, whether it's related to the situation in Syria, or whether it's related to the alleged hack by Russia in an effort to influence our presidential election.  Does the President have any plans to reach out, pick up the phone, speak to his counterpart from Russia, Vladimir Putin, and talk about some of the same issues that we're talking about all this week?

MR. EARNEST:  I'm not aware of any calls that are planned.  But obviously the President has had a number of occasions to see his counterpart and to talk to him about these issues.  Obviously, the President saw President Putin for a brief period in Lima, Peru, when we were there for the APEC Summit -- I guess it was just last month.  It feels like about a year ago.  President Obama also had an opportunity to see President Putin in China when we were in China for the G20 meeting in September, the meeting of the world’s 20 largest economies.  And over the course of his time in office, President Obama has had conversations with President Putin on the phone and in person to

At this point, I'm not sure that there's a situation that they've talked about more than the situation in Syria.  They've had multiple opportunities to do that.  Obviously, there are even many more conversations that occurred between Secretary Kerry and his Russian counterpart, Foreign Minister Lavrov.  So there's been deep engagement with the Russians.  But I'm not aware of any upcoming conversations between President Obama and President Putin.  But if one does occur, we'll let you know.

Q    A lot of conversation has occurred this week as it relates to President-elect Trump's decision to nominate Rex Tillerson as his Secretary of State.  And a knock on him from a number of critics appears to be his preexisting relationship with Russia, his preexisting relationship with Vladimir Putin.  Do you see this as a knock, or do you think it can be helpful to have a preexisting relationship with someone who figures so prominently in America's foreign affairs?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, look, obviously, you have outlined the case that the Trump administration has made in favor of the nomination.  There are others who have raised concerns about the wisdom of choosing someone who has been awarded the Order of Friendship by Vladimir Putin to represent U.S. interests around the globe, considering the adversarial nature of our relationship with Russia on so many important issues.

There are some areas where we do effectively cooperate with Russia already and have done so to the benefit of the American people.  But look, I'll let others make the argument on both sides.  I think the argument that I would make is simply:  People shouldn't be surprised.  The President-elect ran on a platform of pursuing warmer relations with Russia.  He indicated his frustration and signaled a potential lessening of our commitment to NATO.  He referred to President Putin as a strong leader.  So it shouldn't be particularly surprising that he chose someone who got the Order of Friendship medal from Vladimir Putin to be his Secretary of State.

Q    Would that be a bad thing?  U.S. relations with Russia are at perhaps the lowest level they've been since the Cold War, since maybe the early 1960s.  Do you think that relations between the U.S. and Russia should remain at the level where they are right now, or do you think there is room for improvement with Russia, vis-à-vis the United States?

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah, I think what the President would say is that he would welcome additional opportunities to try to advance our interests by working with Russia.  But that's going to require not additional concessions to Russia but a willingness on the part of the Russians to deal honestly with their American interlocutors in pursuit of their stated goals.

     So, for example, just to go back because it's the most pertinent one, Russia says that they are committed to working with the international community, including the United States, to go after ISIL.  There's no evidence for that.  And, in fact, what Russia has done against ISIL has been rolled back and ISIL's capabilities have been heightened and worsened because of Russia's poor decisions.

So in some ways, until Russia signals a willingness to pursue a different approach in their relationship with the United States, I think we're going to encounter some choppy waters here.  I think what President Obama has tried to do is to try to prevent our disagreements in some areas of Syria and in Ukraine from allowing us to make progress in some other areas.  And whether that's our cooperation on the space program or the success that the United States and Russia had in eliminating the declared chemical weapons stockpile of the Assad regime.  There are some areas where we are able to work effectively with the Russians, and the American people have benefitted from it.

But if we want to see more of that, I think we're going to need to see a change in behavior and a change in strategy on the part of the Russians.

Maggie.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Circling back to the Office of Government Ethics, they recently are urging Trump to act as if he must follow financial conflict of interest laws, but as Trump has pointed out, the President is not legally bound by these.  Do you think it's time to update federal ethic laws to make sure that the President does have to follow these laws, that it's a law?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I think all I can say to you is what President Obama has done, and as I described earlier, President Obama didn't just follow the ethics rules as if they applied to him -- he went far above and beyond them and made sure that there was not even the appearance of a conflict of interest when it comes to his personal finances.  And he did that in a way that disadvantaged him financially but was good for the country because it erased any doubt about his true motivations.

So the President also believed that that actually benefitted his presidency because he wasn’t in a position in which he was sidetracked by allegations of a personal conflict of interest.  And he set a very high standard for ethics that people throughout his administration have followed.  And it’s why the President is quite proud of the fact that his administration has not been plagued by the kinds of major personal scandals that have plagued other presidencies.

Q    So would you say then that the argument of selling a lot of real estate would make Donald Trump lose money is not a valid argument?

MR. EARNEST:  I think the incoming administration and the President-elect are going to have to make their own decisions about how they handle the situation.  But if President-elect Trump were to sustain a financial loss in order to enter the Oval Office, he would not be the first one.

Toluse.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  I wanted to go back to the comment you made about how people shouldn’t be surprised that Donald Trump is selecting someone who has close ties to Russia given the fact that he said all of these things on the campaign trail that were seen as friendly to Russia.  It kind of seems to stand in contrast to this idea that once Donald Trump leaves the campaign trail and gets into the office, he’s going to be woken up by the realities of the office, and all of those sort of incendiary things he said on the campaign would not be the actual policies that he pursues.  And that seems to be the message that the President was giving when he went overseas and spoke to NATO partners and other partners.

So what’s the message?  Is it that people shouldn’t be surprised and they should brace for Trump to follow through on all of this rhetoric that he had on the campaign trail?  Or is that -- the office will change him and he’ll moderate on some of those positions?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Toluse, I think it’s hard to assess, because you have in the past heard Mr. Tillerson say positive things about the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Paris Climate Agreement.  So does that mean -- so I guess -- I cite those two examples to illustrate that we’ll have to see.  It’s unclear.  I think what we might be seeing now is that the President-elect cares more about his Secretary of State’s position on Russia than he does about his Secretary of State nominee’s position on trade and climate change.

But again, when you go back to the rhetoric of the Trump campaign, it’s not particularly surprising that the President-elect appears to be prioritizing over a bunch of other important issues.  But what that actually means for the kinds of policy they will implement, that’s something that we’ll all have to wait and see.

Q    I also wanted to ask you about the -- give you another chance to maybe weigh in on the Energy Secretary pick.  Obviously, President Obama selected a Nobel Laureate physicist in Ernie Moniz who -- you know, highly respected and --

MR. EARNEST:  Merely a physicist at MIT.  (Laughter.)

Q    Right.  So I’m wondering if, given the fact that Moniz had such an important role in the Iran nuclear deal negotiations, I’m wondering if the President has any thoughts about the former Texas governor becoming the next person for this position.

MR. EARNEST:  I’m really tempted to, but -- (laughter) --

Q    Give in.

MR. EARNEST:  -- maybe if you want to come by and chat in my office, I’ve got some good zingers for you.  But I think I will try to exercise some discipline and refrain from commenting any more than I already have, admittedly, about --

Q    You could just tweet it.

MR. EARNEST:  If I can remember them all, I’ll share them with you after this briefing.

Q    I’ll stay tuned for that.

One more on the stock market.  Obviously, it’s hitting record highs on a regular basis, almost at 20,000 in the Dow, and Donald Trump and his surrogates are claiming credit for that.  Obviously, you all said there’s only one President at a time, so I wondering if you have any thoughts on whether or not this rally has anything to do with the current President or the President-elect.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’ll let the significant number of market analysts who follow the market more closely than I do comment on individual market movements.

I’ll just make the broader observation that since the depths of the Great Recession that President Obama inherited, the stock market has more than tripled.  We’ll see if the economic policies that the incoming President implements have a similar positive effect.

He campaigned on vowing to try things differently.  He campaigned on the idea that we need a different economic approach.  And we’ve laid out a number of times -- and we’re getting late here, so I won’t do it again -- but we’ve laid out a number of times the benchmark that the incoming administration will have to live up to.  And we’ll see if they do.  But an important of them is the stock market.  And the stock market, since was at its nadir in the summer of 2009, has more than tripled.  And we’ll see if President Trump’s economic policies have a similar positive impact on the market in a way that has a positive impact on the savings and retirement savings of millions of American workers.

Taka, I’ll give you the last one.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  President Putin will visit Japan tomorrow to meet Prime Minister Abe.  What do you expect from the meeting?  They will meet in Japan twice, in Tokyo and in Prime Minister Abe’s old prefecture.  What do you think of Prime Minister Abe’s decision to maintain warm relations with President Putin?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, you know, President Obama, as I mentioned earlier, has had a number of conversations with President Putin over the last year.  Obviously, Russia has faced some significant diplomatic isolation from the international community, including the G7, of which Japan is a member.  We used to refer to that meeting as the G8, back when Russia was included in that meeting.  They no longer are because of their willingness to violate the territorial integrity of Ukraine.

So I can’t speak to what may be on the agenda or what Prime Minister Abe intends to discuss with President Putin, but while we have been able to work effectively with the international community to isolate Russia -- and they are facing more isolation than they have in recent years -- we also acknowledge that the United States benefits from our allies, like Japan, having good relations with other countries around the world.  So, presumably, that will be what Prime Minister Abe is pursuing when he meets with President Putin later this week.

Q    Are you concerned that the meeting may send the wrong message that the G7 is not united, and may put pressure on Russia?

MR. EARNEST:  I have no doubt that Japan and the other members of the G7 remain firmly united about the need for Russia to observe the basic territorial integrity and sovereignty of the nation of Ukraine.

Thanks, everybody, we’ll see you tomorrow.

END
1:43 P.M. EST
12:55 P.M. EDT

MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Happy Monday.  I hope you all had a good weekend.  I do not have any comments at the start, so we can go straight to questions.

Josh, would you like to start?

Q    Sure.  Thanks, Josh.  Why don't we start with Aleppo?  Does the U.S. government still think it's possible to prevent Aleppo from falling to the Syrian government, or is it possible to concede at this point that it's a lost cause?

MR. EARNEST:  Josh, the United States government continues to be deeply concerned about the situation in Aleppo, and the violence there is only increasing.  The risk facing innocent civilians has been grave for some time.  It continues to worsen. Despite our best diplomatic efforts to reduce the violence and increase the flow of humanitarian assistance, the Assad government, backed by the Russians, continues to try to bomb innocent civilians into submission.  And it's a terrible situation that does not appear to be getting better.

Q    And the U.S. is saying that Russia has turned down a U.S. offer for a ceasefire.  What were the terms of that ceasefire?  And given that it seems that Russia and its Syrian partners are on the verge of winning 98 percent control of the area in Aleppo, according to the Syrian forces, why would Russia agree to our terms at this point?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I can't speak to the intricacies of the conversations that were taking place between Secretary Kerry and some of our top diplomats and their Russian counterparts.  There were other countries that were involved in these conversations as well.  So I can't speak to intricacies of the proposed arrangement, but I can certainly tell you what the goals were.  The goal was to try to end the bombing, and the few innocent civilians that remain -- try to get them out of harm’s way, and try to allow the flow of humanitarian assistance to these communities that have been shut off from the outside world for a long time.

So those were the goals all along.  And in the months and years that we've been negotiating to try to find a diplomatic solution, we've been rebuffed by the Syrians because, with the backing of the Russians and the Iranians, they’ve continued to wage this war with virtual impunity.

Q    Are you still pursuing a ceasefire effort with Russia at this point?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, the door remains open and we continue to be interested in trying to find a diplomatic solution to the situation not just in Aleppo but in Syria because we know that there’s not a military solution that can be imposed on the situation.  So, yes, we are still interested in diplomacy.  We still are open to and interested in trying to find a diplomatic solution.  But optimism is not high.

Q    And turning to the cyber interference in the U.S. election.  Does the White House -- well, I know you guys are doing your own investigation that the President has called for to hacking.  Does the U.S. support congressional inquiries into that, and would you cooperate with them?  And if so, do you have a preference as far as the format -- whether that should be the Senate Intelligence Committee, a select committee of some sort or other format?

MR. EARNEST:  Josh, we certainly have long supported the principle of congressional review of this matter.  There has been intensive cooperation between the intelligence community and other national security agencies and members of Congress in both parties, both before and after the election.  The briefings have been provided in a variety of settings, both classified and unclassified.  In some cases, it's briefings of members.  In some cases, it's briefings of staff.  In some cases, it's briefings of both.

So one of the stated goals of the ongoing review that the President ordered last week by the intelligence community was to compile information that could be presented to Congress.  Presumably, that information would be useful in supporting a congressional review of this matter that is certainly warranted when you consider the stakes and the consequences.

So we support the principle of congressional review, but I wouldn't weigh in with an opinion right now about which committee should bear that responsibility.

Q    But if Congress in some format takes upon itself to start a committee and look into it, even as you're doing your own investigation, the investigation would comply and cooperate to help that get moving forward?

MR. EARNEST:  Absolutely.  And as I mentioned, Josh, the administration and national security professionals, both high-ranking officials and those farther down the chain, have been in regular touch with members of Congress on this matter.  There’s been a substantial number of briefings and extensive communication between national security officials and Congress because of the rightful role that Congress has in this matter.

Q    And I'm sure that you saw over the weekend the President-elect and his team disparaging the CIA, bringing up the Iraq war stuff, openly disputing the assessment of the intelligence community about Russian hacking, calling it ridiculous.  Is the President concerned that the President-elect is undermining confidence in the intelligence community with those kinds of remarks?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, President Obama’s experience over the last eight years has been that the men and women of the intelligence community in the United States are patriots.  These are men and women with specialized skills, in many cases, who have chosen to not just dedicate their careers but dedicate their lives to our national security.  They don't do it for the fame and the glory; in most cases, their identities are never known.  I guess in many cases, their identities are never known.  They aren't doing it because the pay is great.  In many cases, these are professionals with substantial capabilities, with areas of expertise that would allow them to get a much bigger paycheck in the private sector.

These are men and women who dedicate themselves to this cause because they love this country.  And President Obama has benefitted enormously from their work, from their expertise, from their advice, and from their service to the country.  And President Obama is certainly not the first President to have enjoyed the benefits of the experts in our intelligence community, and I'm confident the President-elect would benefit from that advice if he remains open to it.

Ayesha.

Q    Following up or continuing along the issue of the cyber-attack, I was wondering -- the Trump team has said that -- well, first I guess I want to ask, does the White House have a position on if the Russians were interfering, trying to -- attempting to interfere with the election, what their motives were?  Was it to actually help elect Donald Trump?  Or was it just to create chaos?  And on top of that, the Trump team has said that this is an effort to delegitimize the results of the election.  And I was just wondering, what does the White House say to the American people when they are hearing these reports about Russian interference?  There are all these investigations going on -- to the average American, this may raise questions to them, even though the intelligence isn't necessarily questioning or saying that the actual votes were hacked or anything like that, the appearance of the interference could raise questions in the minds of Americans.  So what does the White House say to that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ayesha, there’s obviously a lot there.  Let me start by reminding you of the statement -- extraordinary statement that was issued by the U.S. intelligence community the first week in October.  In that statement that reflected the consensus view of 17 different intelligence agencies, they've concluded and reported to the American public that Russia was engaged in malicious cyber activity in an attempt to destabilize our political system.  That's a significant charge.  And the fact that the intelligence community came forward and made public this assessment is extraordinary, even unprecedented.  That's the first thing.

The second thing is there was a lot of reporting over the weekend about additional intelligence assessments that have been reached.  If that's something that can be shared publicly, that's going to come from the intelligence community.  It’s not going to come from here.  And that is evidence of the continued commitment of this administration to ensuring and even protecting the integrity of the basic institutions of government, including the intelligence community.

That all said, you didn't need a security clearance to figure out who benefitted from malicious Russian cyber activity. The President-elect didn't call it into question.  He called on Russia to hack his opponent.  He called on Russia to hack Secretary Clinton.  So he certainly had a pretty good sense of whose side this activity was coming down on.  The last several weeks of the election were focused on a discussion of emails that had been hacked and leaked by the Russians.  These were emails from the DNC and John Podesta -- not from the RNC and Steve Bannon.

It was the President-elect who, over the course of the campaign, indicated that he thought that President Putin was a strong leader.  It was the President-elect who indicated the potential that he would withdraw from some of our critically important NATO commitments.  It was the President-elect who refused to disclose his financial connections to Russia.  It was the President-elect who hired a campaign chairman with extensive, lucrative, personal financial ties to Russia.  It was the President-elect who had a national security advisor on the campaign that had been a paid contributor to RT, the Russian propaganda outlet.

The President-elect’s team, his campaign, didn't make any effort to obscure this.  So all of that is information that was not obtained through intelligence channels.  It’s not information that was disclosed for the first time at the White House.  It’s all information that all of you reported on.  It’s information that all of you reported on well in advance of the election, and it’s all information that is, as far as I can tell, undisputed.

So I think what it does, it probably leads people to a variety of conclusions.  One conclusion that it leads me to is the special responsibility that members of Congress have to take a close look at this -- particularly those members of Congress that endorsed Mr. Trump in the election.  They were aware of all this information, too -- not because they were getting classified briefings, but because it was available to the public.

So I think in some cases, we’ve seen some pretty heated rhetoric from Republicans wringing their hands about this and about the potential impact it has on our national security and the integrity of our system of government.  I think they should spare us the handwringing and fulfill their basic responsibility, considering the bar has been raised based on their political choices.

Q    But with everything that you just laid out, President-elect Trump has disputed the idea that Russia favored him or that Russia was behind or interfering, meddling in the election.  I mean he says that no one knows what’s going on.  So you basically laid out a case that that’s not the case.  And if -- and just going on what you just said, doesn’t that cast a cloud over this election -- I mean, everything that you just laid out saying that this is clearly done to favor President-elect Trump?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, a couple of things here.  The first is the conclusion about Russia’s involvement in malicious cyber activity to undermine confidence in our political system represents the consensus view of the intelligence community.  There’s no disagreeing with that.  And that’s the reason that they came forward with that extraordinary statement a month before the election.  So there is no -- there certainly should be no dispute about that.  And the material that I cited, again, is not information that you’re hearing from me for the first time.  This is information that all of you have reported on, thoroughly investigated, and discussed on television.

So, again, there’s no debate I’m seeking here.  I, as I’ve done in the past, tried to just lay out some objective facts.  The debate, the argument about the policy differences and the differences in agendas pursued by the President-elect and President Obama -- we had an opportunity to have that debate, and that was the subject of an extensive debate.  And the election didn’t turn out the way that we had hoped.  And since then, I’ve gone to great lengths to try to avoid getting into a debate with the President-elect’s team because our priority is on fulfilling the President’s basic, institutional responsibilities to effect a smooth transition to the next presidency.

So what I’ve stated in not an argument, but really just a presentation of objective facts about what all of you and the American public knew in advance of the election.  And, yes, this was all material that was known by Republican politicians in the Congress that endorsed the President-elect.  And how they reconcile their political strategy and their patriotism is something they’re going to have to explain.

Q    One more topic.  The President-elect also, over the weekend, he talked about his call with Taiwan and basically raised questions about whether the U.S. needs to be bound by the one-China policy.  Obviously, China is very upset about this and has raised serious concerns about it.  I was wondering -- I know that the Obama administration is saying that the one-China policy is still in effect, and it’s very important.  But I guess is there a concern going forward?  Because it seems like the next administration is not going to take that stand.  It’s like what are the consequences, I guess, if President-elect Trump follows through without respecting or with not respecting the one-China policy?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the United States government under the leadership of President Obama has been and remains firmly committed to our one-China policy.  That's also the policy, by the way, that previous Presidents in both parties have pursued.  And our country has benefitted from adherence to that policy.

One reason that we have pursued that policy is because the Obama administration does not view Taiwan and our relationship with Taiwan as a bargaining chip.  Taiwan is not a source of leverage.  It’s a close partner of the United States.  Taiwan is the ninth largest trading partner of the United States.  And bargaining that away is not something that this administration believes is in our best interest.  And in fact, I think you’d be hard pressed to make the case that it’s in the interest of Taiwan.

But what we have been able to do by pursuing that policy and adhering to that policy is to have a close partner in Taiwan and a constructive relationship with China, where we've been able to make important, even historic progress on climate change; and where we've unlocked cooperation on the Iran deal.  We would not have succeeded in completing a diplomatic agreement to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon without China’s effective cooperation.  We've been able to lower tensions around cyber issues, and we have been able to work effectively with the Chinese to ramp up pressure on North Korea.

We certainly don't agree with the Chinese on everything.  But where common ground does exist, we've been able to make progress in a way that benefits the American people and benefits the Chinese people and, when it comes to climate change, benefits the planet.  That kind of progress is much more difficult if tensions are heightened around our one-China policy.

Justin.

Q    I guess I wanted to go back to the presentation of objective facts, and it seems obvious that both Donald Trump and his campaign don't necessarily agree with that.  We heard Donald Trump on Twitter I think this morning that it’s impossible to tell who is responsible for hacking without catching them in the act.  And then John Bolton, who’s been a top advisor to him and is reportedly in line for a job at the State Department, last night floated the idea that the hack of the DNC could have been a false flag operation, and insinuated that perhaps the Obama administration was responsible for that.  Obviously, I think both those statements raise a lot of questions.  But I’m wondering what your response to either of those charges is.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I’ve tried to avoid responding to some of the charges from the President-elects Twitter feed.  And what I’ve tried to do is just to present objective facts.  And I think the objective fact that's relevant here is the intelligence community, a month before the election, came forward and presented a unanimous view, a high-confidence assessment that China was engaged in malicious cyber activity to destabilize our political system.

Q    You said China.  You mean --

MR. EARNEST:  I’m sorry.  Russia.  Flipping back and forth between topics.  Tricky.  But thank you for clarifying.  But listen, the intelligence community’s assessment was unanimous and direct about Russia’s malicious cyber activity.

Q    Can't you just say that he’s wrong on both these fronts?  We can -- isn’t that what you're trying to say here, that the U.S. can determine a hack even if they don't catch someone in the act, and that the Obama administration did not conduct a false flag operation on the DNC?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I will rule out that the United States, in any way, engaged in the kind of false flag operation that a wide range of irresponsible conspiracy theorists have put forward.  So we can dispense with that.  But, look, I’ve gone to great lengths to try to avoid the whole charges-counter charges. So the President-elect has said one thing on Twitter.  But 17 intelligence agencies of the United States have come forward.  They came forward two months ago to put forward their unanimous assessment about Russia’s malicious cyber activity.  And I’ll let you and the American people judge who is in a better position to defend their argument.

Q    Sticking with this morning’s Twitter, President-elect Trump said that costs on the F-35 project were “out of control,” and that he hoped to save billions on the project going forward. This is a problem.  Their project has been sort of plagued by delays and cost overruns in the past.  I’m wondering if you agree that there are still issues going forward, or if the administration’s position is that costs have stabilized for the F-35.

MR. EARNEST:  I can't speak in detail about the F-35 program.  I know that we have worked hard to institute the kinds of reforms that would limit cost overruns.  What impact that would have on the F-35 program is something we can look into for you.  As we discussed a little bit last week, this administration has put forward a wide range of cost-saving reforms that Republicans in Congress have either rejected or even refused to consider.  Now, keep in mind, these are reforms that our military leaders say would save taxpayers money and would make the country safer.

So I guess you’d have to ask Republicans why they can both claim -- or how they can both claim to be fiscal conservatives and tough on national defense when they’re blocking reforms that would save taxpayer dollars and make the country safer.  That's hard to reconcile.  But I think one could conclude that they’re actually more focused on politics and obstructing the agenda of the Democratic President than they are on actually trying to save taxpayers money or keep the country safe.

Q    Finally, the vice president of Aetna today was testifying about the merger, and said that his company should have withdrawn from all of the Obamacare marketplaces because the program wasn’t economically viable.  So obviously there’s some question about whether they did so for reasons surrounding this merger.  But I'm wondering -- this is something he said under oath -- whether you would dispute that, and whether if a major insurer at this point said this in testimony at a trial, what that kind of says about the overall health of the Obamacare program.

MR. EARNEST:  I didn’t see the entirety of his testimony, and obviously I'm going to allow business executives to make whatever business decisions they believe is in the best interests of their company and their shareholders.  I think I'd just point out that since the Affordable Care Act went into effect stock prices of most health care companies have gone up, in some cases quite substantially.  Many health insurance companies have been able to effectively provide coverage through the marketplace that has been good for their company’s bottom line and good for their company’s shareholders.  It's also been good for the United States of America -- 20 million more Americans have access to quality, affordable health insurance.  The growth in health care costs is at a near all-time low.

So I think the benefits of our approach speaks for itself when you consider the way that millions of Americans have benefitted from health care reform under President Obama, and we've been able to design a reform of the private health insurance market in a way that ends up being both good for customers, but also good for providers as well.

Gardiner.

Q    Josh, what does it mean that Trump has upended two of the most sensitive relationships that the U.S. has -- Russia and China?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I -- President Obama has obviously worked hard to manage those relationships in a way that gives the United States the opportunity to capitalize on common ground where it exists even as we speak bluntly about our differences.  And in each case, our differences are substantial, but in each case, effective diplomacy resulted in both those countries bolstering our effort to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon and further isolate the North Korean regime for their destabilizing activities on the North Korean Peninsula.

Those are just a couple of examples.  There are also individual examples with regard to our relationship.  Obviously the United States was able to work effectively with Russia to destroy the declared chemical weapons stockpile of the Assad regime.  That would not have occurred had the United States and Russia not been able to work effectively together.  And because we did that there are tons of chemical weapons that are not floating on the battlefield in Syria that could potentially fall into the hands of ISIL terrorists.  Those chemicals have been destroyed because the United States and Russia worked together.

It doesn’t mean that we patched up all our differences with Russia.  It means that we identified a common interest and didn’t let our differences interfere with our ability to achieve it in a way that makes the world safer.

A similar analogy exists around climate change with regard to the U.S. relationship with China.  The ability of the United States and China to work together to reach a mutual agreement to cap our carbon emissions catalyzed the international community in reaching an historic Paris agreement about a year later that's actually the first time the United States -- or the first time the world has come together to confront this substantial challenge.  And that's evidence of tough, principled diplomacy that doesn’t ignore our differences but rather prevents our differences from blocking our ability to advance our interests and do good things for the American people.

And ultimately the next President will have to determine what kind of approach he wants to take in managing those relationships to ensure that we can protect our interests but also capitalize on opportunities when they arise.

Q    “Ultimately” seems to be happening right now.  There’s obviously a longtime understanding that there is one President at a time, but this President-elect seems to be almost uniquely interfering in the international affairs of President Obama.  You are having to scramble in your discussions with the Chinese.  This President-elect seems to be scrambling somewhat your relationship with the Russians.  Can you talk about the particular challenges you are facing in this transition considering that the comments and the tweets that this President-elect seems to be affecting in real time, right now, your relationships with two of the most important countries in the world?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think, Gardiner, the truth is that, as we discussed quite extensively in advance of the election, that rhetoric and tweets and tactics of the President-elect were having an impact on our relationship with countries around the world.  We talked in here quite extensively about how other world leaders had raised concerns with President Obama or raised worries with President Obama about that rhetoric and some of those comments.  This is not particularly new.  They certainly do have -- take on added weight now that they don’t just come from the Republican nominee but that they come from the President-elect.  But ultimately this is part of what a transition is about, which is trying to lay the groundwork for the next President to succeed.

So we’re going to continue to try to make very clear to countries around the world -- both our allies and countries like China and Russia that are decidedly not allies -- exactly what the longstanding policy of the United States has been, because in many cases those policies are in the best interest of the United States.  But what the President-elect chooses to do with that opportunity will be up to him.

Q    Josh, is the President concerned about the President-elect singling out individual companies like Lockheed which then see their market values plunge?  You have spoken about the power of words from the President before -- their effect on markets.  This President-elect seems to not just fail to understand that, but almost gleefully use his comments and his tweets to affect not only the behavior of companies but their stock prices, their valuations, and the rest.  Do you see that as an appropriate use of presidential power and prerogative?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, look, ultimately President-elect Trump has been advocating a different kind of strategy for economic growth and job creation in the country, and we're going to have an opportunity to see if it works.

President Obama has pursued a strategy that's rooted in investments in the middle class and focusing on the best interests of people who are in the middle class and working hard to get there.  Those investments in infrastructure, asking those at the top of the income scale to pay a little bit more, have resulted in a strong economy.  Our economy is currently in the midst of the longest streak of job growth on record.  Over the last 81 months, 15.6 million private sector jobs have been created, and unemployment has been cut in half since the peak of the recession.

I went through before about the positive trends that we're seeing related to wages and reduction in inequality.  The stock market has even tripled since the lows that it hit in March of 2009.  And the poverty rate fell farther and faster in 2015 than it had in any year since the 1960s.  Those the results of the economic strategy that President Obama has pursued.

And the President-elect is already showing the different kind of strategy that he intends to pursue.  And we’ll see if it works.

Q    Josh, you obviously have, over the last year, had very critical comments about Mr. Trump, comments that you have not gone away from.  You have stood by them.  You've simply said that we're now focused on the transition.  I’m just -- you, a year ago, mentioned that Mr. Trump had fake hair.  I’m just wondering if you still stand behind that.  And is there a hair transition going on?  (Laughter.)  Is there some training of barbers to deal with this challenge going forward?

MR. EARNEST:  So, look, I think anybody who has done this job for two and a half years I think has probably said a thing or two that he or she wished they hadn’t said.  And I think you've identified one of the things that I wish I hadn’t said.

Q    Hair-raising stories.

MR. EARNEST:  Let the puns begin.  Although, let’s keep that to Twitter.

Olivier.

Q    Josh, you mentioned the early October announcement from the intelligence community.  You talked about I guess this new internal look at what the evidence shows about Russia’s activities.  The President is the ultimate declassifying authority.  How much evidence, as opposed to merely findings, are you willing to declassify to show to the American people to back up these really startling claims?

MR. EARNEST:  Olivier, this process is one that the President ordered just last week, and men and women in our intelligence community are working hard to do this review and prepare as much information as possible about what transpired, about how it happened, and what Russia was hoping to accomplish. So I wouldn’t prejudge at this point what will actually be included in the final report, in the final review.  But the President certainly is interested in getting to the bottom of it.

And one of the goals of doing the review, one of the purposes of doing the review is to communicate with the American public what we know.  There are going to be some limitations in our ability to do that because we're also going to have to protect the sources and methods that are used by the international community to obtain this information.  Those are sources and methods that on an ongoing basis are critical to our national security.

So it seems unlikely at this point that the entire report would be declassified and released.  But certainly the classified elements of the report will be shared, including with Congress in those classified channels.  And we’ll release and declassify -- we’ll declassify and release as much information as we can.  But at this point it’s hard to predict exactly what that means.

Q    The other October statement was about what China -- Russia -- sorry, you’re contagious --

MR. EARNEST:  It’s tricky, isn’t it?

Q    What Russia was trying to do.  Was Russia successful, ultimately?  And if they were, does that mean that on this President’s watch, Moscow was able to influence an American election?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, so I think it’s important, Olivier, to understand the two goals -- or sort of the two priorities that we’d identified.  The first is the protection of the basic election administration infrastructure of the country.  You’ll recall that we had detected that some entities tied to Russia had succeeded in intruding on some websites used by election administrators across the country.  Now, we also talked a lot about how difficult a task it would be to succeed in disrupting the casting and counting of ballots, primarily because our election infrastructure is decentralized and administered in a variety of ways, and so that could make it -- that would make hacking that system -- that decentralized system -- quite challenging.

But the integrity of our election system is critical to our democracy.  And so this administration did work effectively with Democratic and Republican election administrators all across the country to help them bolster their cyber defenses against those Russian intrusions.  This is an effort that was run through the Department of Homeland Security.  And there were experts in the cyber department of Department of Homeland Security who worked with officials all across the country to bolster those defenses.

And what the intelligence community has said since Election Day is that there was no increase in malicious cyber activity from the Russians against the elections infrastructure that interfered with the ability of people to cast ballots and have them counted accurately.

So that was a priority.  And there was an enormous amount of work, much of which took place behind the scenes, that went into protecting the integrity of the system that we have in this country for casting and counting ballots.

Separately, there was a concern about the hack-and-leak strategy that Russia had used against Democrats and allies of the Clinton campaign.  And in the five weeks since Election Day, we've heard from a lot of experts and analysts reviewing the election and trying to understand how this surprising outcome came about.  And there are a variety of theories and analyses that have reached a variety of different conclusions.  So I’m confident that people will take a look at all of this.

I know that there are some people, particularly on the Democratic side, who have been harshly critical of some of the decisions that FBI Director Jim Comey made in releasing some information about the Bureau’s investigation of Secretary Clinton. There are others who have been critical of the electoral strategy pursued by Secretary Clinton -- both in terms of her messaging, but also in terms of her travel in battleground states.  This is something I think people are going to be chewing over for quite some time as they try to read the electorate and discern what factors may have contributed to the outcome.

Margaret.

Q    Josh, you rattled off a number of facts, as you said, publicly acknowledged, widely reported information linking Russia and Donald Trump --

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, that are not in dispute.

Q    Right.  But that also does sort of take the White House off the hook for not having launched this probe earlier.  Do you regret not having launched it prior to the election?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, to be clear, the only reason that the intelligence community could release a unanimous assessment of Russia’s malicious cyber activity is because they've been investigating it.  So this is something that our intelligence community and our national security infrastructure was closely monitoring.  They've been doing that for a long time.  And they are aware, and we've discussed the unique vulnerability that the United States has in cyberspace, given how our advanced economy is so reliant on those kinds of Internet connections for elements of our daily life.  And so our national security infrastructure is oriented to monitor threats to that system and to try to protect against vulnerabilities.  So this is something that we've been closely watching since long before the election started.

Q    Well, why not announce the probe back when the DNI released the statement in October?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, the reason that the statement was released was precisely because there was an ongoing probe.

Q    Right, but this new probe you're characterizing as something new, something more than what had already been --

MR. EARNEST:  This review is just a retroactive one.  So this is a probe that won't just include a review of malicious cyber activity in the 2016 election; it also will include a close look at potential cyber intrusions in 2012 and 2008 that --

Q    -- think that was required in October?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, the malicious Russian cyber activity that was announced in October was already under investigation.  So this was something that we were already looking at.  That's the only reason we were in a position to talk about it.

Q    Because you know -- because Donald Trump and a number of his team members are characterizing this as politically motivated, not just false flags, but frankly, made up by the administration, saying -- the President-elect himself tweeted out, saying if this was known why wasn’t it said prior to the election?  You point out that in October we were saying that, yes, but for the White House not to have -- or at least be perceived to have put its shoulder behind this kind of probe the way that the President has now done is what I'm trying to get at.

MR. EARNEST:  I see.

Q    Why didn’t he do that then?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, in part because -- well, again, so it's important for people to understand that this is something that was the subject of an ongoing investigation.  Even in the days and weeks leading up to the election.  Our intelligence community, our national security agencies, including the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security, were closely watching Russia’s malicious cyber activity.  There was an ongoing investigation.  It was being investigated.  It was being closely watched in order to protect our democracy.

What is also important is not just the mobilizing and marshaling of that expertise to protect the country in cyberspace, but also to protect the integrity of the institutions.  You all covered the election closely and know how it would have been consumed if the President had -- to borrow your phrase -- put his shoulder against the intelligence community and pressed them to conduct an investigation that would have called into question, just weeks before an election, whether or not politics was driving that decision.

That's why, at every turn, President Obama prioritized the integrity of our national security infrastructure and our intelligence community.  Now that the election is over, it's important for the integrity of our democracy for our intelligence community the take a look at what happened in 2016 and in 2012 and in 2008 to ensure that as our country conducts future elections that we can more effectively confront some of the malicious forces that may be seeking to interfere in our system of democracy.

Q    But to counter some of those accusations about the motivations of the administration in announcing that, can you just make clear whether -- rule out, if you would, if that is, in fact, the case that you were not in any way suggesting that the results of the election had been compromised?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think this goes back to Olivier’s question -- I'm trying to make sure that we don't talk past each other.  I think the thing that is really clear and something that we have acknowledged for weeks now is that the intelligence community did not detect any increase in malicious cyber activity on Election Day that interfered with the casting and accurate counting of ballots.  That is not my opinion; that is based on the close monitoring by the intelligence community and other national security agencies that have a responsibility of protecting us in cyberspace.

But what’s also clear is that the results of the hack and leak operation carried out on the orders of Russia were extensively discussed in the weeks before Election Day.  The results of those operations were extensively discussed.  There was a daily leaking of John Podesta’s emails at websites that all of you news organizations closely monitored.  And those are editorial decisions that are left in your hands and the hands of the people who work at your news organizations.  But you weren’t waiting for leaks from the RNC or from Steve Bannon.

And I think that's illustrative of -- well, people can draw their own judgments, and obviously the intelligence community will do the same thing.  But you don't need a security clearance to get access to that information to draw your own judgment.

Q    Well, there are some on Capitol Hill -- Democrats among them -- who are saying the White House has pulled its punches with Russia, and on this particular issue they have been concerned that there hasn’t been a stronger response.  At the time, the White House said there would be a proportional one.  Has there been a response?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, at the same time that we discussed the fact that there would be a proportional response we also made clear that the details of the response were something that we were unlikely to be able to discuss in public.  So if --

Q    Were they undertaken at all?

MR. EARNEST:  Again, even to confirm the nature of our response at this point -- well, I'm just not going to be in a position to discuss exactly what the response is or will be.  There are a variety of reasons for that.  But I can offer the same assurance that I did before the election that the President and his team believe that a proportional response is warranted.

Q    Is it safe to assume that the announcement of this probe isn't the extent of the response?

MR. EARNEST:  At the risk of going down a slippery slope on this, yes, it is fair for you to assume that this probe is not the extent of the response to Russia for their malicious cyber activity in the run-up to the election.

Andrew.

Q    I just want to clear something up, Josh.  You seem to be -- correct me if I’m wrong -- but you seem to be suggesting that Russia didn’t have to hack ballot machines or the actual vote tally in order to have a determinant effect on the outcome of the election.

MR. EARNEST:  I guess what I’m doing is I’m trying to be as specific and as clear as I possibly can about what our approach to confronting this challenge was, and the first was taking a close look at what steps would be necessary to protect our elections infrastructure and to protect the accurate casting and counting of ballots.

And there was a whole lot of work that took place behind the scenes in the weeks and even months leading up to Election Day by experts at the Department of Homeland Security with election administrators all across the country to protect their systems against Russian cyber intrusions.  And what we have learned since Election Day is that, based on the careful monitoring of a variety of national security agencies, we can conclude that there was no increase in the Russian malicious cyber activity on Election Day that was aimed at disrupting the casting and counting of ballots.

But, separately, you’ve asked this other question about the hack and leak operations carried out by the Russians.  There’s no denying that the results of those hack and leak operations were part of the debate in the days and weeks leading up to Election Day.  That also is just an objective fact.  There was extensive coverage of the daily leaks of John Podesta’s emails.  That’s just -- that’s true.

To the extent that any Republicans were hacked, the only time that occurred as far as I can tell is when Colin Powell’s emails were hacked just so that they could release information critical to Secretary Clinton.  That seemed to be the only revealing thing in the emails from General Powell’s email account that were released.

So, again, I think there’s -- and again, that’s not based on any intelligence assessment.  That doesn’t require a security clearance.  That’s something that was widely reported by all of you, and I think an indication of the kind of information that people can use as they factor into their judgment about what Russia may have been trying to do.

Q    But you accept that it’s possible that that alone could have affected the outcome of the election?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, as I mentioned in response to Olivier, there are a variety of factors that many people legitimately think contributed to the outcome, and whether you want to question the propriety of some of FBI Director Comey’s pronouncements or the wisdom of Secretary Clinton’s strategy for campaigning -- those kinds of things are open to debate and I think will be open to careful analysis by political scientists for months, if not years, as they try to determine why the election outcome was so surprising to so many people, including both candidates.

Q    Just to follow up on Margaret’s question -- this question has a proportional response.  There must have been a debate here at the time about whether your response should be covert, and I'm wondering if, in retrospect, you think -- whether you think there could be a revisiting of that decision, given the level of unease among U.S. citizens about what’s happened, and level of unease in democracies like Sweden and Germany, where people believe that their system of government is under threat.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I think what I will acknowledge is that there are a variety of policy questions that are raised in the United States and in democracies around the world based on what transpired in the United States on Election Day, and in days and weeks that led up to Election Day.

I'm just not going to be in a position to talk about the internal conversations about a potential proportional response other than to say that those discussions have occurred and the President concluded that a proportional response was appropriate. But at this point, I just can't get into the wisdom of how or whether or when that proportional response could be publicly discussed.

Q    Would you expect the President to revisit that decision once the results of the review have come through?

MR. EARNEST:  Not necessarily.  I mean, look, the thing that I've said all along is that proportional response is appropriate; we may or may not be in a position to disclose what that response is.  That's still true.  There still could be a time when this is something that we're able to discuss more publicly.  If there is, that wouldn't necessarily reflect a change in our position or strategy.  But at this point, it's difficult to speculate exactly how or whether that will play out.

Q    Well, except that the Vice President said that he hoped that we didn’t know what would happen -- right?

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, he did say that at one point.  And, look, I think that goes to many of the questions that are raised about whether or not discussing the proportional response in public could undermine the effectiveness of that response.  But it's, ironically enough, difficult to assess that if you can't discuss the response itself in public.

Ron.

Q    So is this where the White House intends to leave this issue of how determinative or not the hacking operation was or wasn’t to the outcome of the election?  You're essentially saying it's one of many factors that happened during the final run-up to Election Day, and the President can't determine whether that was more significant than whether Secretary Clinton had campaigned here or there, or what -- is that where you leave us?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, at least for today, I don't have any sort of election analysis -- official White House election analysis to put forward.

Q    That's what people want to know -- does the President think that the Russians swung this election somehow.  Simple question.  It's not a simple question, but it's the question -- that's what people want to know.  Does the President think the Russians swung this election somehow?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I think what we're focused on right now is trying to understand exactly what the Russians did, collect as much available information as we can about that, try to assess what their motives were.  And, look, I think this may be a question that people are going to continue to ask as Congress steps forward to fulfill their responsibility that they have to take a look at this.  And, look, I think in some ways this is going to be a pointed question -- in some ways, this is not just a question to ask the President; this is actually an even better question to ask supporters of Mr. Trump’s campaign, many of whom now, at least in Congress, are worried about the answer to that question.

Q    Because you think that they will conclude that the hack and leak operation did, in fact, swing the election?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't know what they would conclude.  But what we have right now on Capitol Hill is a situation where many Republicans who offered their endorsement of the Trump campaign, less than five weeks later are now publicly worrying about Russian influence.  And again, how they reconcile their political strategy and their patriotism is a question that they’re going to have to answer.

Q    Just on one -- you talk about on Election Day and the analysis that's been done -- you say there was no increase in Russian malicious activity then.  The word “increase” kind of stands out.  Was there some malicious Russian activity going on that did not increase on that day, so there was a baseline of ongoing malicious Russian activity?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, we certainly know that there is a baseline of Russian malicious activity in cyberspace, and I think that's a given and I think it's something that we're all aware of.  For more details about what the intelligence community perceived on Election Day, that's something you’ll have to ask them.  But what --

Q    You're essentially ruling out that the Russians did something on Election Day that altered the vote count -- that somehow, mechanically or otherwise, in key states like Pennsylvania, Michigan, Wisconsin, where there was this “surprising outcome” -- you are ruling out that the Russians did anything that caused that?  Or are you not ruling that out?

MR. EARNEST:  What I am saying is a little repetitive, but that's by design.  I'm trying to --

Q    But that's the issue, and we understand -- the hack and leak and the election.

MR. EARNEST:  But I'm talking specifically about this question that you're posing about cyber activity and the counting and casting of ballots.  And for more precision, I'd refer you to the intelligence community.  But I think it's pretty clear what I'm saying here, which is that on Election Day there was no observed increase in malicious Russian cyber activity that altered or disrupted the accurate casting and counting of ballots.

Q    There are a number of electors who are requesting an intelligence briefing before they vote.  Does the White House support that?

MR. EARNEST:  I saw those reports shortly before I walked out here, and I understand that some of them may have sent a letter to the intelligence community or to the White House.  I haven't seen the letter, so we'll take a look and --

Q    Conceptually, does the White House support that?  Or do you think we need to just kind of close the book on this?

MR. EARNEST:  I'd want to take a look at the letter before I respond.

Q    And just one last thing.  On these reports about the President-elect declining daily presidential briefings, intelligence briefings, how concerned is the President about that in terms of the security of the nation, which is obviously is his main objective?  How concerned is the President that the President-elect is apparently not doing these briefings on a daily basis?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess a couple of things come to mind. The first is over the course of the Republican primary, the President-elect had criticized President Bush for not sufficiently protecting the country from 9/11, and even criticized him for not carefully listening to the Presidential Daily Briefing that was later declassified that warned of 9/11.

So the President-elect, certainly firsthand, understands how important the presentation of this intelligence information is.  And as I mentioned at the top of the briefing, President Obama has deep respect and admiration for the men and women of our intelligence community that work literally through the night to compile an intelligence briefing for the President of the United States that includes the most accurate, up-to-date information possible.  And in order to make good decisions, a President has to have access to good information.  And by good information, I mean information that is accurate, that is up to date, that is presented clearly, and President Obama has benefitted from that.

The decisions that he’s made have benefitted from that, and the American people have benefitted from that.

What’s also true is that the intelligence community needs to be able to operate without fear of retribution for presenting bad news.  That's often part and parcel of the Presidential Daily Briefing.  These are the bad things that are happening in the world, or these are the potential negative consequences for the United States as a result of a global event.  It’s important for the intelligence community to not be in a position where these professionals who are dedicating their lives to the protection of the United States are not subjected to retribution just because the person who is reading the briefing may not want to hear bad news.

Q    So it sounds like you're saying the President is concerned that the President-elect is not taking these briefings.

MR. EARNEST:  What I’m saying is that President Obama has benefited enormously, and the country has benefited enormously, from his ability to make good decisions based on good information.  And the only way that he is able to obtain that good information -- and by good information I mean up-to-date and accurate information -- is because of the tireless efforts of the experts and patriots in the intelligence community.

Kevin.

Q    Would it then be a mistake for the President-elect to not do the same, especially once he assumes the office?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, the President-elect is going to have to develop his own routine and his own strategy for educating and equipping himself with the necessary knowledge to make good decisions for the country.  And like every other American, I’m hoping he’ll do that.

Q    Let me circle back on the one-China question that you fielded earlier.  How important is that policy for U.S.-China relations and the stability in that region?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, as I mentioned the day after this issue arose -- or at least the first time that this issue arose in the Briefing Room, which I think was a week ago now -- I made clear that this is an issue the Chinese government considers to be highly sensitive.  And disrupting this policy could have a disruptive effect on our ability to work with China in those areas where our interests do align.  That reflects the high priority that China places on this policy and on Taiwan.

I would also point out the United States values the close partner that we have in Taiwan.  Certainly, President Obama doesn't view Taiwan as a bargaining chip.  This is our ninth largest trading partner in the world and shouldn’t be used as a point of leverage.  It doesn't end up being good for our relationship with China.  It also doesn't end up being good for Taiwan.

Q    Last, ask you about this notion that some are floating that what’s essentially going on -- sort of the false flag point that was made earlier -- is when people talk about hacking by Russia, they talk about this issue or that issue, and even as Ron mentioned, some nine Democrats and I believe one Republican elector are suggesting they’d like to see sort of the intel breakdown of what’s happened vis-à-vis the Russian hacking.  The long and short of it is people are suggesting that there are some out there who are trying to delegitimize the election of President-elect Trump.  Can you understand why they might have that perspective when they look at it broadly through that lens?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what I would say -- I think what I can account for is the conduct and language that's being used by this White House and by this President of the United States.

And less than 12 hours after the election results were in, President Obama was standing in the Rose Garden committing his administration and his own personal effort to executing a smooth and effective transition for the benefit of the country and so that the Trump administration could get off to a running start.

A day later, the President of the United States invited President-elect Trump to sit with him in the Oval Office for 90 minutes, talking about a range of important issues.  And then in an unprecedented fashion, we invited all of you into the Oval Office to hear directly from the President-elect and the President of the United States as they articulated their shared commitment to a smooth and effective transition.

So I think that the actions and words of the President of the United States in the 48 hours after the election I think make clear his commitment to fulfilling his institutional responsibility to give the incoming President the best opportunity to succeed in uniting and leading the country.

Jordan.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  I want to change subjects and ask you about a letter that Neil Eggleston sent to Senators Feinstein and Burr regarding the Senate Torture Report.  In that letter he told them that the report is going to be kept in the Presidential Archives but that President Obama instructed the Archivist to keep that material classified for the full 12 years that's allowed under the law.  What I want to know is if the report or parts of the report are going to become declassified anyway, why not just make them declassified now?  Why wait the 12 years instead?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the important thing to remember here, Jordan, is that a substantial portion of the report has already been declassified, right?  That there’s an executive summary and other critically important parts of the report having been declassified and released so the American people could consider it.

With regard to other aspects of the report, ultimately the intelligence community will have to review the material that's included in that report to determine what can be released.  And I certainly think the hope is that there will be an opportunity for the American public to consider the findings of the report and learn some lessons about what kinds of steps we want to take as a country to protect ourselves and how important it is to ensure that those steps are consistent with our values.

Q    Wouldn’t that decision take on a little more urgency given the concern that you've expressed, that the President has expressed, about what President-elect Trump has said about the use of torture?  Why not speed up that decision on declassification?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think there’s ample information included in that report on this topic that has already been declassified.  And we’ve had an opportunity to wage this debate in public on a number of occasions, and I know that there’s at least one official that’s been nominated to a senior position in the incoming administration who has expressed the same kinds of views that are included in that report about the ineffectiveness of torturing terror suspects.

Gregory.

Q    The President is going to sign the 21st Century Cures Act in a signing ceremony tomorrow across the street here. Signing ceremonies have been pretty rare of late around here.  President Obama has actually done fewer than his immediate predecessors, especially in the last couple of years.  Is that an indication that the President feels that the legislative accomplishments during his presidency haven’t been worth celebrating?

MR. EARNEST:  No, I think it’s an indication that there’s been very little passed by Congress under Republican leadership that’s worthy of a signing ceremony.  Not going to have a signing ceremony for a post office naming.

And when you take a look at what Congress has passed, you can do it pretty quickly.  I know there are a variety of ways to measure the ineffectiveness of a particular Congress, and there are a variety of metrics that you can use to show that Republican -- that this most recent Republican-led Congress has been as ineffectual as any in history.

One metric for that is to actually take a look at the bills that President Obama has vetoed.  And we can get you the specific metrics, but there aren’t many.  It’s not as if Republicans use their significant majorities in the House and Senate to pass bills cracking down on illegal immigration, or slashing business tax cuts, or slashing business taxes, or slashing taxes for wealthy people -- all things that Republicans claim that they support and campaigned on getting done.

No, what Republicans have done is they have passed a handful of bills that do nothing other than strip away Obama administration initiatives.  So President Obama, for example, had to veto a bill passed through reconciliation that would have repealed the Affordable Care Act.  Republicans passed legislation that would have repealed regulations governing clean air and clean water and labor regulations.  They’re not advancing their own agenda, they’re just trying to take away the President’s.

And I think this underscores the intellectual vacuum at the center of the Republican Party right now.  It’s how they succeeded in nominating and electing a President that many of them doubt shares their conservative philosophy.  We’ll see.  And in fact, the only bill that President Obama has signed and has been overridden by Republicans in Congress is a bill that Republicans tried to fix that same day to address the concerns that President Obama had raised in vetoing the bill -- “immediate-onset buyer’s remorse,” one smart political operative labeled it.

I think it’s an indication of just how bankrupt the Republican governing agenda has been.  There isn’t one.  And I think the fact that there have not been many signing ceremonies and not been many vetoes is as clear an indication as any.

Q    Well, obviously, there’s two actors in this, right?  There’s the President and there’s Congress, and they have to work together in most cases, unless you have a super majority, to get anything done.  But historians tend to look at presidencies for their body of legislation.  So can you talk a little bit about what President Obama, over these past eight years -- since this may well be the last -- certainly one of the last bills he’s going to sign, probably the last he’ll do so publicly -- what is the President most proud of as a legislative accomplishment?  And is he disappointed, looking back, that he was not able to fulfill many of the promises legislatively that he set out to do?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, there’s no doubt that the President has been deeply disappointed at the lack of effort put forward by Republicans to try to find common ground where it actually exists.  The President has been profoundly disappointed that Republicans in the House of Representatives blocked consideration of a bipartisan immigration reform bill that would have passed had it come up for a vote.  But House Republicans made a cynical political decision to prevent that bill from even being considered.  And the President is quite disappointed by that.

I will say, though, overall, when you consider the kind of legislative progress that we were able to make when Democrats were in charge of the Congress, the President’s resume looks quite strong.  Even when viewed over the span of eight years, that was a remarkably productive two-year period.  Everything from the Recovery Act that contributed to the President’s strategy to prevent a second Great Depression; the Affordable Care Act that expanded access to health care for 20 million Americans; a reform of Wall Street that has ensured that taxpayers are never on the hook for bailing out a Wall Street bank for making risky bets.  But in the time since the Wall Street reform bill has been signed into law, we’ve seen a remarkable, impressive economic growth, job creation and increase in the stock market.

So those are three examples off the top of my head.  There’s one other example that I think is also relevant here.  In 2012, while Republicans did have a majority in the House, President Obama did succeed in doing something that Republicans had blocked for almost 20 years, and that’s getting them to raise income taxes.  But Congress did vote to raise income taxes on the wealthiest Americans in the lame duck period after the 2012 election.  And that was the fulfillment of a promise that President Obama had made on the campaign trail, and that has had a positive impact on our deficit.  It’s had a positive impact on the notion of a fairness in our tax code.  And it’s had positive benefits for our economy.

And we can run -- I’ll spare you running through sort of the metrics that we can use to evaluate the wisdom of this strategy, but when the incoming administration lays out their economic strategy, I hope you will go back and take a close look at the impact, the strength that the American economy enjoyed under President Obama’s leadership and see if the performance of the next administration measures up.

Q    Josh, this tomorrow’s signing, the last -- is that the last bill that the President is going to sign in public?

MR. EARNEST:  I would expect it will be the last bill that he signs in public, but maybe they’ll pass something quickly and interesting after -- when they return in January.  But I don’t anticipate that will happen.

Maggie.

Q    Circling back to the Presidential Daily Briefing.  Do you think that the incoming President has any reason to doubt the intelligence during that briefing?  Has President Obama every questioned some of the intelligence that happens during the Presidential Daily Briefing?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, look, Maggie, the people who are presenting the briefing are people who are seasoned intelligence professionals.  They’re experts in their field.  In some cases, they are individuals who have a remarkable educational background or academic background in a particular field, or they’re experts in technology.

The intelligence professionals who compile the Presidential Daily Briefing work very hard to do so.  And the do so without a lot of glamour.  They don’t do so in the limelight.  But they ensure that the President has the most accurate, up-to-date information possible in order to make good decisions about the country and our national security.

There certainly are occasions where the President wants to have a discussion about some of the CIA findings or the findings from the intelligence community to understand why they’ve reached certain conclusions or why they’re putting forward some analysis. And that does mean that the President is asking questions, and then the intelligence community is coming back to him to further explain what is being presented.  But the President has never doubted the motives of the people who are presenting that information.  And that’s because the President has insisted that the intelligence that’s presented to him should be accurate and up to date, and not influenced by politics, and not presented in a way that seeks to curry favor with the person receiving the briefing.  If the news is bad somewhere in the world, the President wants to know, so that we can have an opportunity to try to address it.

That’s why I think it’s particularly important that intelligence professionals, as they have been under the Obama administration, understand that they’re not going to face retribution just because they present some bad news.  In some ways, that’s the whole point of the exercise, is to make sure that the President understands the dangerous and threatening things that could be happening around the world so that we can properly orient our defenses to protect the American people.

Q    If this intelligence is so important to helping shape President Obama’s decisions around the globe -- President-elect Trump is having a very public rift with the CIA right now.  How detrimental is that to him coming in as President, and is that something that we should be concerned about?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I’ll let the President-elect work to establish his own relationship with the intelligence community.  I can just tell you that President Obama has benefitted enormously from the hardworking professionals at the intelligence community who literally work through the night to provide him the most up-to-date, accurate information in the morning so that he can spend his day making decisions that are rooted in that information.  The decisions and the outcomes are going to be better if the President has access to accurate information.  And that’s certainly the expectation that he has for the intelligence community, and they’ve delivered.

Michelle.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Just three quick questions before the sun starts setting here.  (Laughter.)

Q    Three?

Q    When you mentioned -- in all the discussion we’ve had about the Russian hacking, you also mentioned certain ties to Russia within the Trump campaign.  You mentioned that Donald Trump didn’t disclose financial ties to Russia, that he had at one point called on Putin to look into Hillary Clinton’s emails. Did you put those out there as a suggestion that it is possible that there were ties to this hack within the Trump campaign?

MR. EARNEST:  I observed these facts because they seem relevant to the judgment that people might draw upon as they assess the impact of Russia’s malicious cyber activity.  These are objective facts that were not produced by the White House or the intelligence community.  They don't require a special security clearance.  They don't require any special knowledge that's found anywhere other than in the newspaper or on cable TV.

So I don't have a new intelligence assessment to present.  But there certainly is ample information for people to consider to draw their own conclusions about what Russia’s motivations may have been in undertaking this unprecedented malicious cyber activity.

Q    So you're saying they seem relevant based on Russia’s potential motivations, and not going the other way?

MR. EARNEST:  When you say going the other way, what do you mean?

Q    That you're not suggesting that they're relevant because there could be a possibility that there was some working together there.

MR. EARNEST:  I can't speak to that.  What I’m merely presenting is as people consider this question that Ayesha asked me about whether or not Russia was seeking intentionally to benefit the Trump campaign.  My response is I don't have an assessment from the intelligence community to share with you.  But there’s ample information that people can and should use that was available before the election that doesn't require a security clearance that will allow people to reach their own conclusions.

Q    Okay.  And you mentioned that -- when we talked about Donald Trump saying that there’s no evidence that Russia was behind this hack, your response was that there shouldn’t be a question there.  But what is the administration’s take on the fact that he does repeatedly say this regardless?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I don't want to get into a place where there are charges and counter-charges being traded between the President-elect’s team and the President’s team, because our most important priority right now is trying to fulfill our institutional obligation to ensure a smooth and effective transition.

So you have the argument that's put forward by the President-elect, and you have the statement that was put forward by the intelligence community two months ago revealing their unanimous conclusion that Russia was engaged in malicious cyber activity in an attempt to destabilize our political system.

Q    Do you see any risk in those statements that are repeatedly made publicly?

MR. EARNEST:  Which statements are you referring to?

Q    Donald Trump’s statements that there is -- refuting the evidence that the intelligence community has talked about.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, there are plenty of concerns I could express about any number of things that the President-elect has said, but the time for those debates has come and gone.

Q    Thanks, Josh.

MR. EARNEST:  Mark, I’ll give you the last one.

Q    Thanks.  Josh, on the matter of the PDB, there are some days when there is no PDB listing on this schedule that we receive for the President.  Are those days on which he does without a PDB?

MR. EARNEST:  Those are days in which the PDB is presented in writing to the President.  And I’ll just say in general that there is a mechanism for the kind of feedback that I was referring to earlier, where, if the President has questions or is seeking additional information based on what’s presented, there is a mechanism for him to seek that that doesn't require a face-to-face interaction.

Q    Is that the case on weekends, as well?  A written PDB?

MR. EARNEST:  I think what I can say most generally is that on the days in which there is not a PDB listed, typically what occurs is the President would receive the PDB in writing or in written format I guess is what --

Q    President-elect Trump said on Saturday when he was taping the Fox interview that he expected that -- to speak with President Obama that day.  Did he?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, as I’ve -- as we've encountered in here a few times, I’m going to protect the ability of the President and the President-elect to consult privately.

Q    But since he mentioned it, can you confirm it?

MR. EARNEST:  I can't confirm it.  If the President-elect and his team choose to do that, they're certainly entitled to that.  But I’m going to go -- I’m going to do my best to protect the ability of the President and the President-elect to consult privately.

Q    And lastly, on the question of bill signing, did the President wait up late on Friday night to sign the CR?

MR. EARNEST:  I believe that that's how it -- it was signed --

Q    He signed by hand?

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, it was signed by hand shortly before he received the official notification that the bill had been signed.

Q    It was about 10 of 1:00 a.m.

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, so it was a late night on Friday night.  Okay?

Q    Okay.

MR. EARNEST:  All right, thanks, everybody.  We’ll see you tomorrow.

END
2:25 P.M. EST
2:50 P.M. EST

MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Happy Friday.  TGIF, for one last time.

Q    Friday, the 13th.

MR. EARNEST:  That's good luck.

Let me do one, quick announcement before we get to your questions.  Today the White House is hosting a transition exercise with current and perspective Cabinet members, agency heads and senior White House officials.  The exercise provides an opportunity to familiarize members identified by the President-elect to fill senior administration positions on the authorities, policies, and coordination structures that this administration has used to respond to major domestic incidents.  Cabinet members, agency heads and advisors in the current administration will share experiences and lessons from incident responses that they have led as they discuss a number of response scenarios together.

This exercise, which we announced back in November, advances the President’s goal of conducting the most professional, seamless transition possible.  We'll be in a position to provide some additional details at the conclusion of the meeting.  You’ll recall that an exercise like this was held in early 2009 between -- it was hosted by senior officials from the Bush administration and they invited their counterparts from the Obama administration at the time.  And this is the next step in the process of ensuring a smooth and effective transition to the incoming administration.

So, with that, Darlene, want to get us started with questions?

Q    Thank you.  Is this an all-day sort of exercise?

MR. EARNEST:  It's not an all-day exercise.  I know it's a multi-hour exercise.  So it's ongoing as we speak, and I suspect that it will encompass a significant portion of everyone’s afternoon schedule.

Q    Is there any more detail you can provide on exactly what they’re doing and how they’re doing it?  Are they breaking up into little groups and doing exercises?  Are they doing policy and all things domestic?

MR. EARNEST:  The way that it's been described to me is that this is primarily a large-group exercise and will be an opportunity to discuss a variety of different scenarios, some related to domestic emergency response -- response to a natural disaster or a significant weather event, for example.  But it also will include some foreign policy and national security exercises as well.  And it will include both a review of responses that this administration has led to specific incidents, as well as exercises to walk through the options that are available in the context of a hypothetical event.

Q    And what senior administration officials from this administration are participating?

MR. EARNEST:  We'll get you some additional information about the participants in the meeting once the meeting is concluded.

Q    On another subject, will the President signed the waiver that's moving through Congress to allow General Mattis to serve as Defense Secretary?

MR. EARNEST:  I think we've indicated in the past that that's not something that the President would prevent from passing.  So, yes, I think you can anticipate that if it did make it to the President’s desk the he would sign it.

Q    Thank you.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.

Ayesha.

Q    Thanks.  I want to follow up on the actions on Cuba yesterday, on the ending of “wet foot, dry foot.”  I wasn’t clear -- is this a move that can be overturned by the next administration?  Realizing that it is the ending of a policy, but is this something that could easily -- they could come in and decide they want to put that policy back in place?

MR. EARNEST:  This policy change was codified in an executive agreement between the U.S. government and the government in Cuba.  As even some of the incoming administration’s nominees have noted, there’s a tradition of subsequent Presidents observing and adhering to the executive agreements that were put in place by the previous President unless, of course, a specific decision is made to change the policy.

So, obviously, President-elect Trump will assume the awesome responsibilities of the American presidency on January 20th, one week from today.  And he'll be able to exercise all of the executive authority that are invested in the presidency at his discretion.  We believe that there is a strong case to be made about normalizing relations between our two countries, and this is just the latest step in that process to ensure that we are treating Cuban migrants the same way that we treat migrants from other countries.  And that has a variety of benefits, including not providing an incentive for Cubans to attempt the very dangerous journey across the 90 miles of ocean that separate our two countries.

So I think the response to this announcement I think is indicative of how public opinion is changing on these issues, including in the Cuban-American community.  And I noted the supportive comments of someone like Jorge Mas, who is the chairman of the Cuban American National Foundation, somebody who is a leader in that community, obviously an influential voice.  And his indication of support for this step I think is an indication of a growing majority of Americans who agree about the direction that the President has moved the relationship between the United States and Cuba.

Q    Does the White House have any message to those -- I mean, there were -- there have been a number of stories done on people who were just at, like, the Mexican border trying to get across who had come from Cuba, made a very long, treacherous trip and were just there and just missed getting over before this policy was ended.  Does the White House have any message for those people that were just there?  I mean, some of these stories sound pretty heartbreaking.

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I think the first thing that's important for people to understand is that the migrants from Cuba will be treated in the same way that migrants from other countries are, which is to say legitimate claims for refugee status or for asylum will be subject to due process, which means that their claims will be evaluated.  And if they have legitimate claims for asylum, then that will be granted.  But that will be adjudicated through the regular process that every other -- that migrants from other countries go through as well.

And as we've talked a lot about immigration policy over the last several years, obviously the President believes strongly that the United States live up to our values as a nation of laws and as a nation of immigrants.  And that means abiding by the law, but it also means showing respect and recognizing the humanity in people who are fleeing their home country.  So this is -- and the policy change that we have announced ensures that we are harmonizing and normalizing our immigration policy with regard to Cuban migrants.

Q    On one other topic, the head of the House Oversight Committee has threatened to subpoena the Office of Government Ethics -- the head of the Office of Government Ethics for his comments about Trump’s conflicts of interest.  Does the White House think it's appropriate for Congress to be looking into those comments from the Office of Government Ethics?  Do they think that -- I mean, I think the comment from Chaffetz was that he felt like the head of the Office of Government Ethics wasn’t behaving ethically when he was discussing Trump’s conflicts.  Does the White House have any thoughts about this?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, this is the completion of the congressional Republicans’ swamp-filling hat trick.  They were able to get it done in two short weeks.  You will recall that before congressional Republicans were even sworn into office their first act was to vote in secret to repeal the ethical regulations that applied to them.  And it was only after an outcry from the public and a tweet from the President-elect that they reversed course.

A week later we learned that Senate Republicans were prepared to roll back the standards that they’d insisted on for eight years when it came to making sure that nominees for executive positions had been fully vetted and fully complied with ethical requirements before they were given a hearing before the United States Senate and considered for their nomination.  And Senate Republicans have famously walked that back, such that they are moving through the process nominees that haven't been subjected to the kind of scrutiny that they, themselves -- that Mitch McConnell himself had said was necessary.

And now, to complete the hat trick, we've got the Republican Chairman of the House Government Oversight Committee, the individual who, as much as anyone else in the United States Congress, is charged with providing oversight of the executive branch, is now seeking to intimidate a senior executive branch official who’s responsible for enforcing ethics rules.  He’s threatening to shut down the office of the guy who is doing the job that Jason Chaffetz himself is refusing to do.

It's outrageous -- and I will say, only the latest installment in the embarrassing series of episodes that have characterized Jason Chaffetz’s tenure as chairman of that committee.

You’ll recall this is the guy who was charged with investigating government employees who were using personal email for government purposes at the same time that he’s handing out his government business card with his personal email address on it.  You can't make it up.  This is the guy who led the investigation into Benghazi that the House Republican leader admitted was focused solely on politics and hurting Hillary Clinton’s poll ratings.

So this is not some -- a departure from the series of embarrassing episodes that have characterized his tenure as chairman of the committee.  And it certainly, as I've said before, runs contradictory to the preferences of the millions of Americans who showed up at the polls on Election Day and voted for the guy who is vowing to drain the swamp.  Certainly it's going to make for an interesting relationship between the members of that committee, I suspect.  And I think it will be worth watching -- particularly we'll be counting on all of you to watch the relationship between that committee and the incoming administration.

Michelle.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Speaking of outrage, House Democrats --

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah.  (Laughter.)

Q    -- after meeting with James Comey, and they expressed all kinds of emotions -- anger, concern, lost confidence, yes, outrage --

MR. EARNEST:  I think Washington psychiatrists are going to be doing a brisk business in the years ahead.  (Laughter.)

Q    -- some of them are saying that they have no confidence in the Director of the FBI at this point and that they don't feel like he’s fit to do the job.  I mean, hearing these strong words coming from Democrats -- I mean, we knew, obviously, some of that sentiment was there -- but at this point, Americans have heard anger and doubts coming from both sides related to the FBI and the intelligence community over the past couple of weeks.  What are your thoughts on hearing this and the indication of deep problems that the American public now sees laid bare?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think it is really important to make sure that we don't draw too many parallels between these two different situations.  With regard to the handling of the investigation into Secretary Clinton by the Department of Justice and the FBI, for better or worse, we've spent a lot of time in this room talking about that matter -- not just in October, but, frankly, for a lot of the last two years.  But when this came to a head in October, you often heard me describe the merits of abiding by the longstanding norms and traditions about the way the FBI conducts investigations and traditionally doesn’t talk about those investigations in public.

Now, as I said back in October, and I’ll repeat again, the President does not at all believe that Director Comey was motivated by a desire to influence the outcome of the election. But there are longstanding norms and traditions that have served senior Department of Justice officials well over the years.

Now, there’s also -- as was announced yesterday by the Inspector General, there’s now an independent investigation into this matter.  And that certainly is going to limit the degree to which I can discuss it.  That investigation was initiated at the sole discretion of the independent Inspector General.  That’s the way the process should work.  And presumably, when he’s got some findings to release, presumably he’ll be in a position to do that publicly.

With regard to the situation with the intelligence community, I think it’s different, because I think what you’ve heard from the intelligence community, including from Director Clapper in the statement that he released just a couple of days ago, is the intelligence community feels a strong responsibility to communicate to senior officials as much as possible about what they know, and as much as possible about the information that is available to them.

Now, what Director Clapper also said in that statement is he expressed confidence that the intelligence community was not the source of those leaks.  I verified for you before that the White House is not the source of those leaks.  And I think all of that is an indication that both the intelligence community with regard to this matter and the White House with regard to this matter is following longstanding precedent and tradition and norms and guidelines that have served generations of White House officials and intelligence officials well.

So I think that that’s why I would caution against drawing too many parallels between these situations.  There are obvious similarities between these two cases, but there are certainly some places, as I just described, where the handling of these matters was different.

Q    I think Comey, in his explanations, talked about how he felt the need to share information.  He was choosing between two bad options, but he felt getting that information out there was the right thing to do at the time.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, but by getting it out there, briefing it to the President-elect, making sure that the President-elect himself was aware of the information that had come to the attention of the intelligence community.  He stated in his statement that he could not at this point confirm the accuracy of the report, but I’ll leave it to him and other intelligence officials to describe how they described this information to the President-elect.

Q    Okay.  And does it bother the administration that retired General Flynn was in contact with the Russian ambassador several times on the day that President Obama was sanctioning Russia?

MR. EARNEST:  I’ve read some of these reports and I think, to answer your question as bluntly as I can, it depends on what he said.  And I know that some members of the President-elect’s transition team have tried to describe those conversations.  Obviously, I have zero insight into what may have been communicated back and forth, so I’d refer you to General Flynn himself or spokespeople for the transition who may be able to provide additional insight into the nature of those conversations and why those conversations were initiated.

Q    Okay.  And you, today, and often you sort of list a long string of problems you have with behavior of Republicans in Congress over the last couple of years.  But I wonder if everyday, average Americans who aren’t in this industry or yours really know or care.  I think maybe a lot of that falls on deaf ears.  I don’t know how much of that translates.  And we just heard President Obama, in his latest interview, say that he feels that on some issues that he and his team lost the PR battle.  So why do you think that is?  Why do you think these things that you and he have been stressing as being so important, in some cases so important to democracy itself, they don’t seem to matter?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, as a substantive matter, they do make a difference.  They do have a bearing on the strength and success of our democracy.  But you’re asking I think an entirely relevant question, particularly in light of the election outcome.  Given the sordid record that Republicans have on some of these ethical matters, and have continued since the election, it raises questions about why that didn’t influence the vote of more people.  And I don’t know that I can give you a real direct answer on that.

I think that in some ways, the President addressed this in his speech on Tuesday night pretty directly.  He said that it’s a problem in our democracy when we excuse the ethical shortcomings of people in our own party but are ready to question the motives of people in the other party.  He said it more eloquently than that, but you know the passage I'm referring to.

I think the concern that I'm raising is about one of the basic functions of the United States Congress, which is to provide oversight.  There have been a bunch of ethical questions that have been raised about some members of Congress, about some of the conflicts of interest that loom in the background of some of the nominations that the incoming administration has put forward.  There are some people who fit both those categories.  And the responsibility lies with all of you and with the United States Congress to resolve those questions.

And the real problem I have right now is that there seems to be zero appetite among Republicans who were voted into office by people literally chanting "drain the swamp" for enforcing not tougher ethical regulations -- they're not even doing the basics. They're not even enforcing the minimum standards.  They're trying to roll back those standards.  They're voting to reduce the standards that apply to them.  They're not applying the standards to Cabinet nominees that they have been applying for the last eight years.  And in this case, the most egregious case, you have the person in the House of Representatives, who is most responsible for oversight, suggesting he's going to shut down the office of the independent ethical watchdog of the executive branch.

So, again, they're moving in the wrong direction.  And those are all facts.  I think it would be hard to contest any of this. Is it going to make a difference at the polling place the next time that people have an opportunity to vote for their elected representatives in Congress?  I don't know.  We'll see.  But it does seem like Republicans are taking a pretty big risk, considering the "drain the swamp" chants at their pre-election rallies.  To roll back those ethical standards within their first couple of weeks back in Washington I think does pose an electoral risk to them.  And the last time that Democrats won the majority back from Republicans in the House of Representatives was prompted in no small part by a series of ethical transgressions on the part of congressional Republicans.

But, again, I think it's far too early to be making particularly specific prognostications about the 2018 elections. But we'll see.

April.

Q    Josh, a couple questions and primarily on justice issues.  With the announcement today, kind of makes me go back to something with justice.  The Justice Department put new federal officials on the case for Eric Garner.  Do you believe there's still enough time left in this administration for some action to happen?

MR. EARNEST:  I saw news reports about that.  But I do not have -- as we've discussed in here many times, the White House is not briefed on these kinds of criminal investigations.  Those investigative decisions, including determining which investigators will take a look at a particular case -- those are decisions that are made entirely by the Department of Justice without any influence or input from the White House.

Q    Okay, I understand that, but do you still have time left -- yes, we have next week, but do we still have time left?  Is there still enough time for things to happen?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't know at what stage they are in the investigation, so it's hard for me to assess how much more time they need in order to complete their investigation.

Q    Okay.  And lastly, several of President Obama’s friends have had to do some prison time or jail time.  And there’s one in particular, Congressman Chaka Fattah -- there’s a letter that has been sent to President Obama for a pardon.  What does President Obama feel about pardoning some friends like Chaka Fattah?  Jesse Jackson Jr. has not asked for a pardon, but what does he feel about that issue, about his friends asking for pardons and the possibility of pardons for those people?

MR. EARNEST:  I assume you’re using “friend” in the broadest possible context.

Q    Well, no, they were friends -- no, no, no, when I said -- but when I -- no, no, no.  When I say “friend,” Chaka Fattah was a friend to this administration.  I’m not saying that he was involved. I’m saying there were friends of the administration he was supportive --

MR. EARNEST:  He was a political supporter of the administration.

Q    Right, as what --

MR. EARNEST:  And the President certainly appreciated his political support.  But I think describing him as a friend might be going a little too far here.

Q    And what about Jesse Jr. who was part of the campaign, who was a big part of the --

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’m not sure it’s fruitful for us to assess the President’s relationship on an individual basis with all these people.  But let me just get to the root of your question, which is simply that there is a process in place at the Department of Justice to evaluate petitions for clemency that are filed by individuals who are currently incarcerated or people that have a record that they’re looking to clear.  And the President established this process and has asked the Department of Justice to take the lead in considering these applications, to help process these applications as efficiently as possible and make individual determinations on the merits.  And that’s what the President expects the Department of Justice to help him do, and that’s a standard that we have lived up to.

Olivier.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  A couple for you.  One, can you -- you’ve already been asked for more details about the exercise today, but I’m wondering if you can say now whether this is actual incidents that they’re being walked through, or whether they’re modeled on incidents that -- like, is there an Ebola crisis model?  What exactly are they responding to?

MR. EARNEST:  What I can tell you is it’s a little bit of both.  And I’m sort of -- there’s a reference to it in here.  It will be a combination of both walking through hypothetical scenarios so that the incoming administration can get a sense of what procedures and mechanisms are in place, what resources are available for responding to these kinds of hypothetical incidents so that when a real one comes up they can have a sense of how the process typically works.

But they also will review in some detail real-live incidents that this administration did respond to, to help the incoming officials understand what lessons learned, what best practices we were able to implement to benefit the American people.  So I guess the point is, it will be a little bit of both.

Q    Will you be able to say, like, they looked at a Deepwater Horizon, they looked at an Ebola crisis, they looked at --

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t know how detailed our readout will be afterwards, but --

Q    If we could request as detailed a readout as possible.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.  Okay.

Q    And then Rex Tillerson has been to the White House many, many, many times.  On any of those occasions, as far as you’re aware, did he take a position with administration officials on the merits of sanctions involving Iran?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t know the answer to that question, but I can see if we can try to get you an answer.  As the leader of one of the largest companies in the United States, it certainly shouldn’t be surprising to most people that he did come to the White House on a number of occasions to discuss with senior officials important issues that have an impact on our economy and our national security.  But let me see if I can get you some kind of an answer to that question.  We’ll let you know.

Steven.

Q    Josh, does the President have a reaction to the Department of Justice report on Chicago that there’s a pattern of practices of discrimination and unjustified use of deadly force?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t spoken to the President about the specific report.  I know that this was an inquiry that was initiated at the discretion of the Attorney General.  These kinds of investigations are conducted independently, and the conclusions were put forward based on their own independent analysis of what exactly has been happening in Chicago with regard to the local police force there.

The President does believe that the Department of Justice, as a matter of principle, can play a useful role in helping uncover facts that can then be used to begin to restore trust and faith and confidence in local law enforcement, particularly among those communities that feel as if they’re -- the concerns that they have raised have gone unheard; that surfacing them in the context of these kinds of investigations can be useful in all sides designing the kinds of strategies that would rebuild trust in a way that makes these communities safer, but also makes these police officers more safe as they try to do their dangerous work, as well.

These are men and women, the vast majority of whom are doing this dangerous job for all the right reasons.  These are men and women who are genuinely interested in fighting crime.  They’re interested in the public interest.  They’re focused on trying to keep people safe.  And they’ve got an extraordinarily difficult job.  And if there is something that we can do to make their job just a little bit safer, then we should be looking for ways to do that.

And the President’s hope is that the effective professional, genuinely independent investigations that get to the bottom of some of the root challenges that are facing some of these law enforcement agencies -- that does have the effect of restoring a little trust in making the work that police officers do every day just a little bit safer.

Q    There are some police officers who have said -- high-ranking law enforcement officials who have said that the scrutiny that’s applied on police agencies is leading to -- a Ferguson effect.  Does the President share that concern?  I guess  particularly in Chicago.

MR. EARNEST:  The President, when he’s been asked about this in the past, has indicated that he hasn’t seen any evidence to support that hypothesis.  And I think some of it goes to the argument that I was making, which is that the vast majority of men and women in uniform who put on the blue every day, who go out there to put their lives on the line to keep us safe, are motivated much more by their genuine interest in public safety than they are in covering their own behind, if you will.  And to be totally blunt about it, I think it speaks to their character.

I think there is a reason that people have put forward this hypothesis.  And I think there is a reason that a number of law enforcement officers and leaders have taken some umbrage at that suggestion, because they see the men and women under their command at work every day, and they recognize that they're putting their lives on the line, intervening in dangerous situations to try to protect the public, try to protect public safety, to live up to their motto "To serve and protect."  And they do that even in the face of some of these other -- an environment in which their job is as complicated as it's ever been.

And, again, I think that's a pretty powerful illustration of the character of the vast majority of the American men and women who serve our country as law enforcement officers.

Ron.

Q    Does the President see a connection between the challenges, as you put it, that the department faces and the spike in murders, violent crime in Chicago?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think this goes to the same question.  I think it's difficult to assess exactly what that relationship is.  I think the President's view is that if the local law enforcement agency has an effective working relationship with the diverse community of the city of Chicago -- I should say the diverse communities of the city of Chicago -- they'll be more effective in fighting crime.  They'll also be safer as they do that important work.

And so that's why the President believes it's a worthy goal for us to work in a direction that I know that Mayor Emanuel advocates.  And I know that he's put in some reforms and structures to try to address this basic challenge, and I know that his administration has worked to cooperate with the Department of Justice to try to get to the root of some of these problems and try to design some solutions that would address them.

Q    I ask because the bigger question is, to what extent are the problems in the police department contributing to the crime problem in the city?  And I ask because obviously a lot of people in law enforcement would disagree with any notion that that is contributing to the problem.  And the next step in their argument might be that this is another indication of the President not supporting law enforcement, as he has been accused of in the past and as you're well aware of.

MR. EARNEST:  Falsely and wrongly, but, yeah.

Q    That's why I'm just trying to see if the President sees any connection between problems identified by this DOJ investigation and the spike in murders, specifically.

MR. EARNEST:  And, again, I think the President's view is that if we can get to the root of some of these challenges, we can certainly make law enforcement more effective at protecting the rights of every citizen in their community, even as they aggressively fight crime and keep all the citizens of that community safe.

Q    The other thing is, the President talked to you about this losing the PR battle in the 60 Minutes interview, and he specifically mentioned his inability to get a hearing for Judge Garland.  I'm wondering what other issues out there does he think it was largely a question of not PR but swaying public opinion, or bringing public opinion to bear on the Republicans or on the nation's psyche to get something done.  For example, he talks about the inability to get common-sense gun laws passed.  Is that another issue where he feels that his inability to get public opinion on his side was the determining factor?  Or is there something else out there that was more -- caused it?  But I know, again, it's hard to sort out what caused what, so on and so forth -- beyond Garland, what else was he referring to?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think it's important to differentiate between public opinion and mobilizing the public.  So, for example, when it comes to things like common-sense gun safety measures, closing a gun show loophole, closing the loophole that allows an individual who is on the no-fly list from walking into a gun store and buying a gun -- those are measures that have the strong support of a majority of Americans, a majority of Republicans, a majority of Democrats, a majority of gun owners.  Those are common-sense measures.  And the fact that they are common-sense measures is evidenced, at least in part, by the fact that there is common agreement around the country that these would be good things for the Congress to do.

So I don't know if people needed to be persuaded about the notion of common sense.  But what clearly didn't happen is there was not a successful mobilization of the American people around that common sense to get Congress to act.  And the President has been deeply frustrated by that.

And I think that would -- and I think the Garland nomination would actually fall in that same category, because I think if you take a look at sort of the public view of that situation, the vast majority of Americans didn't have any objections to Chief Judge Garland, which is notable because Republicans didn't really have any substantive objections to him, either -- other than the fact that he was nominated by a Democratic President.

Q    Okay.  So the question is, to what extent is it the inability to mobilize public opinion as sort of a tactical thing, versus misreading public opinion and misreading what’s really out there in terms of what people want in terms of gun safety or Judge Garland, or I don't know -- any other range of --

MR. EARNEST:  Immigration reform I think would be another --

Q    Yes, exactly.

MR. EARNEST:  Right?  Because again, there was strong -- there’s a strong coalition of Democrats, Republicans, law enforcement, religious leaders, faith leaders, business community who support the kind of common-sense immigration reform that this administration pursued and that this administration worked effectively with Republicans in the Senate to pass.  But it was House Republican leaders who got together to block it.

So I think the other element of all this, Ron, is the widespread and damaging dysfunction that Republicans have imposed on the United States Congress.  That strategy of essentially political sabotage was something that did apparently work for them politically, but it was bad for the country.  Some of these common-sense steps are things that would be good for the country, and everybody agrees that they would be.  Immigration reform would have lots of obvious economic benefits.

Q    Right, but on immigration reform, there’s a lot of people who also want to build a wall.  And it seems like there’s more of them out there, based on the outcome of the election, than those who fall in the other category --

MR. EARNEST:  Not when you consider that Secretary Clinton got 3 million more votes.  So, again -- and not when you consider that Democratic candidates for Congress got more votes than Republican candidates for Congress.

So I think what we're illustrating here is I do think that there is a risk of oversimplifying this and saying, well, you know, if you just convinced more people.  That's not actually what it is.  The solution to breaking through this dysfunction is more complicated than that.  And this is a proposition we're going to test because I don't think -- we’ll see -- I don't think, however, that it’s possible to rely solely on dysfunction and sabotage as your organizing, governing principle when your party is in charge of both houses in Congress and the White House.

Q    But what the President seems to be saying is that he believes that he is on the right side on so many of these issues --

MR. EARNEST:  Absolutely.

Q    -- and that the reason that he didn't prevail was more tactical than right or philosophical.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what’s true about a number of the things --

Q    Republicans would argue, well, no, you're not.  You don't quite understand the country on immigration, or on guns, or on the inability of --

MR. EARNEST:  If there are people who are, indeed, saying that, I think those are people that don't -- that aren’t familiar with some basic principles of math, because there is ample public opinion data to indicate at least on the handful of things that we've discussed here -- investments in infrastructure, investments in immigration -- or progress on immigration reform, common-sense gun safety -- there are strong majorities of Americans that agree with the President’s position on this.

But, look, here’s the other disconnect.  Despite the fact that the administration was advocating for those policies that have the strong support of the American public, at least some of those Americans -- despite the fact that they agree with the President on all of those measures -- voted for somebody who doesn't.  And that I think is more complicated than just public relations.

I think there's an element of it that relates to a political strategy, a set of obstruction tactics that were implemented by Republicans.  And I think some of it has to do with how effective the Democratic Party is in communicating with those who aren’t regularly inclined to agree with Democrats.

So I think there's a lot to sift through here.  And some of it actually goes back to the thing that Michelle raised, which is these are issues where people say that they agree with the administration, or the position that's been put forward by the President, but they don’t appear to care.  And does that raise questions about the way that some of these issues are covered in the media?  It might.  But I think that there's a lot of this that we're going to have to spend some time thinking about.  And I think you can be assured that the President, in his post-presidential life, will be thinking about these issues and looking for ways to solve them.

Q    And just last one.  Are you going to do a week-ahead or almost week-ahead?  Full week-ahead?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah, I will do a week-ahead.

Q    And sort of on that, can you tell us anything about Friday and the President?

MR. EARNEST:  I'll have some additional details on that, and we'll do that at the end and look at the schedule.

Alexis.

Q    Josh, a quick follow-up on the tabletop exercise.  I missed the beginning of it.  I just want to clarify, the transition team -- not the actual incoming staff -- but the transition team witnessed a tabletop practice in December, right?

MR. EARNEST:  That's correct.  So that was the December exercise.  This January exercise that's taking place today -- it's ongoing as we speak -- includes some of the individuals who have already been named to senior White House positions.  And in some cases, it includes individuals who have been nominated for Cabinet positions, even though they have not yet been confirmed.

Q    And they're actually conducting it.

MR. EARNEST:  They're actually participating in the exercise, yes.

Q    And just to use that for Inauguration Day -- because of the 2009 threat on Inauguration Day, and the importance of having the outgoing staff here until noon with the incoming, and the meetings that took place that morning, can you just tell us who will be here on the President's staff up until noon?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I can tell you is that our staff will be structured in a way to ensure this continuity of government even through the day in which the handover takes place.  So I can follow up with you with more details about how we'll be staffed here at the White House.  I would not anticipate a significant presence of Obama White House staffers here on the 20th just because the incoming administration will be moving in. But there will be officials who will be available.

Q    Will Denis wait until noon?
MR. EARNEST:  I can't speak to the individual plans of staffers.  I'm not sure exactly what Denis has planned.

Shana, nice to see you.

Q    Thanks for having me.  I wanted to follow up on the question earlier about the call between the Russian ambassador and Flynn.  So, first, could you let me know if the White House was informed of this call at all?  And secondly, I'm just trying to get a sense of how usual or unusual it would be to have someone from the incoming administration, before they've been sworn in, contacting the Russian ambassador or any sort of officials.  Did anything like that happen during the Obama transition period?  Is this typical or unusual at all?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what I can say as a general matter, on principle, you can imagine why these kinds of interactions may take place, why the incoming national security advisor may have the need to contact the representative of a foreign government that's based here in Washington, D.C.  But as I mentioned to Michelle, it depends on what they discussed.  It depends on what he said, in terms of whether or not we would have significant objections about those conversations.

Your previous question about whether or not the White House was informed in advance -- I'm not aware that we were informed in advance if he intended to make the call.  I'll check on that.  And if I'm wrong about that, we'll correct it.  But I'm not aware that we were informed in advance of the call.

Q    So something like, as the Trump administration characterized it, "Merry Christmas, let's get in touch after the Inauguration, let's set up those logistics" -- that would be normal transition business?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, it sounds like it to me.  But again, I can't pass judgment on the content of the conversation because I obviously wasn’t privy to it.

Margaret.

Q    Josh, a follow on that.  Has the White House had any contact or inquired about the nature of any of these conversations?

MR. EARNEST:  I can't speak to the conversations that have taken place between White House officials and General Flynn's office.  And even if I were aware of the details of that, I probably wouldn’t discuss them here.

So obviously what I can tell you is, with regard to White House communications with the Russian ambassador, other than a White House staffer reaching out to the Russian embassy here in Washington to offer condolences on the death of the Russian diplomat in Turkey a month or so ago, I’m not aware of any conversations, at least in this period of time, around the holidays and around the work to develop and issue the response to Russia’s malicious cyber activity earlier this year -- or in 2016.

Q    But I guess the reason all of this timing and the timeline becomes important is getting to the heart of what you’re saying, is it depends on what they said during that conversation.  Refresh my memory:  Did the White House brief the Trump team about the sanctions before they were rolled out on the 29th?

MR. EARNEST:  My understanding is that they were briefed on the sanctions.  I don’t know that they were necessarily briefed in advance.

Q    So if there was a conversation on the 28th, that wouldn’t necessarily raise a red flag to you?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I guess I can’t speak to everything that General Flynn may or may not have known.  So again, I think I’ll let him describe what he knew at the time that he engaged in a conversation with the Russian ambassador to the United States.

Q    Do you find, I mean, the line of questioning, I guess the questions being raised generally fair, having gone through a transition yourself?  I mean, technically speaking, there’s nothing to prohibit contact for an incoming NSA and a sitting ambassador, correct?

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah, I think that’s the point that I was trying to make with Shana, that as a general matter, I don’t think there’s anything wrong, on principle, of an incoming national security advisor having basic contact with the representative of a foreign country before taking office -- or at least the representative of that foreign country in Washington before taking office.

But the whole situation is rather unique, right?  I’m not sure that we've ever had a transition in which the intelligence community concluded that a foreign country made a conscious effort to try to advantage one presidential candidate.  So the fact that the designated national security advisor, who has his own rather remarkable relationship with the Russian government -- the fact that that official was in touch with the Russian ambassador to the United States, I can understand why that was the subject of a column in the newspaper today.

Q    When you said it depends on what he said, you're leaving the door open that there was something to truly question in terms of the motivations, the content of their conversations.

MR. EARNEST:  I think what I'm saying is that I don't know the content of their conversations and I can't raise an objection without knowing the content of their conversations.  I'm also not prepared to say it was entirely appropriate without knowing the content of their conversations.  I just don't know, and it just depends.

Q    And when you said the last contact between the White House and the Russian diplomat here in Washington was around --

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah, let me try to be slightly more precise here.  This was the only contact between the White House and the Russian ambassador during this period of time in which the response to Russia was being finalized and was rolled out the last week in December.  What I do not know is whether or not there have been additional conversations between the White House and the Russian embassy after the first of the year, for example -- or at least since that report was -- since our response was announced.

But obviously, it was a sensitive time in this several-week period in which this response was being finalized.  So obviously there were not a lot of conversations other than this expression of condolence to the Russian government and to the Russian people for the assassination of the Russian diplomat in Turkey.  And that's not something that we talked about in this room because that's an event that took place when we were not doing regular briefings over the holidays, but that was the assassination of a diplomat on foreign soil.  And despite our profound differences with Russia on a range of issues, that's a genuine tragedy.  And the expression of condolence that was made through a staffer here at the White House was genuine, and certainly our heart goes out to the families of -- to the family of that diplomat that was killed in Turkey.

Q    And when you're talking about contact, you're just talking about the White House.  You're not talking about John Kerry and Sergei Lavrov speaking?

MR. EARNEST:  Correct.  I can't speak to conversations --

Q    Or other government contacts.

MR. EARNEST:  Correct.  I can't speak to conversations that may have taken place between State Department officials, for example, and the Russian embassy or other Russian diplomats.

John.

Q    You talked about this process about presidential clemency.  I just wanted to dive into that just a little bit.  Today, WikiLeaks had a tweet that indicated that Julian Assange would agree to U.S. extradition if Chelsea Manning was granted a commutation of her sentence.  There's also a petition out there that calls for the pardon of Edward Snowden; it has over a million signatures.  I'm wondering if those sorts of extraneous factors have any sort of bearing at all on the President's decision when he ultimately decides on these cases.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I can tell you is that the Department of Justice and the President will consider individual clemency applications on their merits.  And there are obviously a wide range of factors that the President and the Department of Justice will consider.  And I think to illustrate one of them would be to illustrate the pretty stark difference between Chelsea Manning and Edward Snowden.

Chelsea Manning is somebody who went through the military criminal justice process, was exposed to due process, was found guilty, was sentenced for her crimes, and she acknowledged wrongdoing.  Mr. Snowden fled into the arms of an adversary, and has sought refuge in a country that most recently made a concerted effort to undermine confidence in our democracy.

So I think the situation of these two individuals is quite different.  I can't speculate at this point about to what degree that will have an impact on the President’s consideration of clemency requests.  But I know that there’s a temptation because the crimes were relatively similar to lump the two cases together.  But there are some important differences, including the scale of the crimes that were committed and the consequences of their crimes.

Obviously, as Chelsea Manning has acknowledged, and as we have said many times, that the release of the information that she provided to WikiLeaks was damaging to national security.  But the disclosures by Edward Snowden were far more serious and far more dangerous.

Q    Just one quick question, a follow-up on that.  Does the Department of Justice come forward with a recommendation on each case to recommend to the President?  Or does he ultimately take that with heavy weight?  Or how does it work?

MR. EARNEST:  The Department of Justice does administer a process where they will review factors about each case individually.  They’ll do so based on the merits, and they will provide a recommendation to the President.  And I think you would expect the President would very carefully consider the recommendation that's made by the Department of Justice before making a final decision.

Q    And then yesterday, at the end of the briefing, you were asked about these photographs that TMZ got ahold of where it was apparent that the First Dog, Sunny, bit a guest here at the White House.  Were you able to follow up on that at all and find out if that was true?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't have a whole lot more to -- more light to shed on that particular situation.  I think what I can say is both Bo and Sunny have been genuine ambassadors to the American people.  (Laughter.)  Thousands of people have had an opportunity to interact, play with those dogs, pet with those dogs -- as you have, my son has, I have.

Q    I heard April say over my shoulder that this has happened before.  Are you aware that the dogs have -- either of the dogs have bitten --

Q    No, it was Barney.  It was Barney.

Q    Barney, okay.


MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware that that's happened before.  And I think that they have represented themselves and our country quite well in their status as the First Dogs.  (Laughter.)

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Did the President by chance have an opportunity to watch to Speaker Ryan last night?  He was part of an interesting public conversation about the Affordable Care Act.  Did the President take in any of that, by chance?

MR. EARNEST:  The President did not watch that last night.

Q    I ask because one of the suggestions that was made in the conversation was that rather than sort of hang on to a program that's apparently in a death spiral, as it has been described by some, with decreasing --

MR. EARNEST:  Not by economists, I’d point out.

Q    By some.  Decreasing choices and increasing premiums, rather than sort of hang on to that, why not repeal it -- even if the process of replacing it takes longer than perhaps they would like?  What do you think about that notion?

MR. EARNEST:  I think it’s a dangerous proposition.  As a Republican congressman said, that's them loading the gun without knowing where it's pointed.  It's dangerous.  It's going to have impact on lives and livelihoods of millions of Americans.  If Republicans repeal the Affordable Care Act, they're going to take away health care from 30 million Americans.  They're going to take away protections from 130 million Americans that, because of the Affordable Care Act, currently cannot be discriminated against because they have a preexisting condition.  Those protections are removed if Republicans repeal the Affordable Care Act.

Q    What if they repeal it and expand Medicare and Medicaid in the process?  Wouldn't that sort of, at least temporarily, cover those who might be impacted while they work on the sort of --

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, let me compliment you for doing much more than any Republican on Capitol Hill has done.  (Laughter.)  You've actually put forward an idea.  You've actually put forward a specific idea that we can evaluate and we can see what impact that would have on our health care system.  Republicans have refused to do that.  Republicans are saying that they'll get around to putting forward a replacement at some point in the future, despite the fact they've been saying that for seven years now.  They haven't put forward a plan.  There's no evidence that they can actually come together around a plan to replace it.

What the President has said is that if Republicans actually are willing to put forward good ideas, including potentially expanding Medicaid or increasing tax credits for people to make the purchase of health insurance on the Marketplace even more affordable, those are good ideas and those are ideas that the President and Democrats in Congress would have been and will, I think in the future, be happy to work with Republicans to implement because it would have the effect of strengthening the Affordable Care Act, expanding further access to health care coverage, and reducing costs for middle-class families.  Those are all good things.  But that's not what Republicans have proposed.  And that's not what Paul Ryan proposed.

When Paul Ryan came face to face with one person who would be very negatively affected by the repeal of the Affordable Care Act, the best he could do was reiterate chewed-over, debunked, politically motivated talking points that may have tested well in focus groups but were not at all satisfying to the millions of Americans whose lives will be put at risk if Republicans follow through on their promise.

Q    Let me ask you about the AG's discovery and ultimately her decision about the situation in Chicago.  Is it fair to say that, ultimately, the buck stops with the mayor -- in this case, the President's good friend -- and I use that expression because I know that's a friend.

MR. EARNEST:  That is true.

Q    Rahm Emanuel.

Q    They're really friends?

Q    Yeah, they're really friends.

MR. EARNEST:  They are.

Q    They are.

Q    Would it be fair to say the buck stops with him?  And how disappointing would that be, as someone who not only knows him well but has affinity for that city, that they were unable, at least at this point, to get a handle on what was obviously something that was happening within the police department?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think, Kevin, I haven't read the Department of Justice report, but I am confident that it will say that the challenges that were uncovered, the problems that were uncovered in the police department have been in place for a long time.  And having heard Mayor Emanuel talk about these issues, it is clear that his interest in solving those problems is genuine.  He's got an authentic interest in trying to address some of these very thorny challenges, because he recognizes -- in the same way that the President does -- that the men and women of the Chicago Police Department are safer and are going to be more effective at fighting crime, and the communities that they patrol will be safer if the breach in trust that has erupted in the last few years between some of the communities in Chicago and the Chicago Police Department can be repaired.

Those repairs are not going to happen overnight.  You don't build trust with somebody overnight.  You build trust with somebody over time, particularly when you're talking about an institution as large as the Chicago Police Department and when you're talking about neighborhoods that are as large and as populated as some of the communities in Chicago.

So it's going to take some time.  And what's going to be required is people like Mayor Emanuel stepping up and showing the kind of leadership that he has for the last several years in making these reforms a priority and making getting to the truth a priority, and genuinely engaging in the kind of work that is hard, is not glamorous, and, in some cases, may not be politically popular in order to get at the crux of these problems.  And I think -- that's why I know that President Obama is proud of the leadership that Mayor Emanuel has shown and is counting on him to continue to show it so that the Chicago Police Department and the entire city can continue to make progress in the right direction.

John.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  Two questions.  First, you and the President have noted from this podium historic firsts.  Does the administration have any comment at all about the news last night that Vice President-elect Mike Pence has selected Justice Clarence Thomas to administer the oath of office to him, and that that will make him the first black American ever to swear in one of the top two officials in U.S. history?

MR. EARNEST:  I was not aware of that announcement from Vice President-elect Pence, but obviously Justice Thomas, for all of our profound differences when it comes to some pretty important basic American values, he is somebody who has had a genuinely historic career.  And I think this is just the latest evidence of the historic nature of the position that he holds, and I think it's also reflective of the political philosophy of Vice President-elect Pence that he would choose Justice Thomas to administer the oath.  But obviously that was a decision that was left up to him.

Q    Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy spoke yesterday, and he addressed some of the concerns about taking time to come up with an alternative to the Affordable Care Act.  And what he said is that they, Republicans, would be criticized in the past if they rushed into a plan, and that by taking their time and considering things they were going to get it right this time.  I’m paraphrasing the Majority Leader.

MR. EARNEST:  Right.

Q    Do you have a response to that, or a comment?

MR. EARNEST:  I’ll try to keep this one short.  Seven years seems like a really long time to me.

Lalit.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  Official Chinese media today warned U.S. if it is denied access to the artificial islands in the South China Sea.  This follows after a few hearings on the Hill. What do you have to say on this?

MR. EARNEST:  I think this is an allusion to some comments that were made by Mr. Tillerson, the gentleman that President-elect Trump has designated to serve as -- or has nominated -- been nominated to serve as Secretary of State.  I would refer you to Mr. Tillerson’s team for an explanation of what exactly he was trying to convey in his remarks.

I can tell you that the policy that's been in place in the Obama administration has been to not take sides in the competing land claims in the South China Sea.  Certainly, the United States doesn't have any claims to any territory in that region of the world.  And what we have suggested is that those with competing claims should seek to resolve those competing claims not through brute force or through intimidation or coercion, but rather through diplomacy and negotiation.

And that is something that we have encouraged all parties to do.  And I don't know whether or not that will be the policy of the incoming administration.  I assume that will be one of the topics that will be covered in first briefing that you guys have in here with my successor.  But that's the policy that's been in place in this administration.

Q    The Asia Pacific pivot was one key aspects of the President’s foreign policy.  Do you feel that it might be dumped in the Pacific in the new administration?

MR. EARNEST:  Can you repeat the first part of your question one more time?

Q    The Asia Pacific pivot was one of the key aspects of the President’s foreign policy.

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, it was.  Again, I can't speak to what foreign policy priorities will be pursued by the incoming administration.

Q    Did it serve as value?

MR. EARNEST:  Oh, I think the interests of the United States of America were advanced in important ways with the commitment of this administration to strengthening our alliances in the Asia Pacific and looking for ways to expand economic opportunity for the American people in the Asia Pacific.

Of course, this administration did complete the trade agreement with the Republic of Korea, something that does deepen our ties with our allies in South Korea.  It also expands economic opportunity for American businesses that are looking to get access to South Korean markets.

Now, what we advocated and what President Obama dedicated a significant portion of his presidency to doing was negotiating a Trans-Pacific Partnership.  This would be a trade agreement with 11 other countries, where the United States would be able to work effectively to level the playing field and impose higher and enforceable labor and environmental standards, enforceable and higher human rights standards, protections for things like intellectual property that would give U.S. businesses access to some of the fastest-growing economies in the world.

The benefits of the policy include slashing 18,000 taxes that other countries impose on American goods and services.  But unfortunately, Congress did not take action on the agreement that the Obama administration negotiated.  And that's unfortunate because early indications are that other countries are prepared to move forward without the United States.

That's going to put U.S. businesses and the U.S. economy at a disadvantage.  It means that other countries’ products are going to be cheaper for some countries to import.  And that's going to put U.S. businesses at even greater disadvantage.  So it’s a very difficult case for opponents of the Trans-Pacific Partnership to make that the Trans-Pacific Partnership would have a negative impact on our economy.

The fact is this would have followed through on a number of the President’s promises, including renegotiating NAFTA in a way that has positive benefits for the U.S. economy for American businesses and for American workers.

So the President believes that the interests of the United States were well served by our policy of rebalancing our attention to Asia, but there certainly is more that can and should be done.  But we’ll have to see what the incoming administration chooses to do.

Chris.

Q    Josh, already at the start of this year, there are a number of proposals in state legislatures that seem to enable discrimination against LGBT people, including measures in Texas, Virginia, and Kentucky that would bar transgender people from using the restrooms consistent with their gender identity.  You've spoken against measures along these lines at your time from the podium.  Is it incumbent upon the Trump administration to speak out against these measures as well as they move forward?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the first observation I would make is I’d encourage the leaders of those states that you named to consult with outgoing North Carolina Governor Pat McCrory about whether or not that's a particularly smart political idea. I’m not sure that it is.

I would also encourage them to contact the North Carolina Chamber of Commerce to determine whether or not the state of North Carolina benefitted economically from implementing these policies.  They did not when you consider the business decisions that were made by not just high-profile organizations like the NCAA and the NBA, but also other businesses that were looking to expand their footprint, and expand their business in that state. They chose not to do so because they were concerned that their employees and their customers were at heightened risk of being discriminated against.

So obviously these states, because of our system of government, have an opportunity to pass and implement laws as they see fit.  But they might consider the experience of the state of North Carolina before they do so.

Q    I know what you think.  But it is incumbent upon the person who --

MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t really kept it a secret, have I?

Q    Yes.  (Laughter.)  Is it incumbent upon the person who takes the podium after you to make a similar case?

MR. EARNEST:  The incoming administration is going to be responsible for what they choose to advocate for.  I've always been proud to stand at this podium and advocate for fairness and justice and equal treatment of every single American.  I think the incoming administration will have to determine if they're going to do the same thing.

John Decker.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  I'm curious about this change in policy as it relates to Cubans that make it to U.S. shores.  Was there any effort by the administration to consult with, reach out to, give a heads up to the Trump transition team or President-elect Trump as it relates to this policy?

MR. EARNEST:  There was an effort, a successful effort, to brief the incoming administration shortly before this policy change was made public.

Q    And give me a sense, if you could, about the reaction coming from the Trump transition team once you gave them an effort to let them know about this policy change.

MR. EARNEST:  I'll let the incoming administration describe their reaction to this policy change.

Q    Talk a little bit about the timing here.  It comes eight days before a new administration takes over and will then be in charge of immigration policy.  Was there any thought about, do we do this now?  It's so soon before the next administration takes over and will be in charge of immigration policy.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, John, it takes time to negotiate these kinds of executive agreements, particularly with a country like Cuba that does not have a long history of negotiating these kinds of agreements with the United States.  For more than 50 years, the United States pursued a policy of diplomatic isolation with Cuba.  And so it's only over the course of the last year or so that we've had the kind of diplomatic opening that will allow us to have these kinds of conversations.  So, negotiating these kinds of executive agreements takes time, but as soon as this agreement was completed, we announced it right away.

Q    President-elect Trump, I think it was in late November, took to Twitter to talk about what he called the deal that has been reached between the U.S. government and the Cuban government.  And essentially, he threatened that he may undo it once he becomes President.  Is that a concern of this administration?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, if he wants to cancel this policy, he'll be cancelling $6 billion of increased exports and financial ties between the United States and Cuba.

Q    It's all about the financial relationship?

MR. EARNEST:  I think it's relevant.  He certainly seems to be motivated by financial interests in some pretty important ways; he has over his professional career.  So I think he'll find that argument persuasive, particularly when you consider that there were reports that his company was negotiating with Cuba for exactly those kinds of agreements.  So he obviously recognizes the economic opportunity that's there.  There's more than a hundred flights every day between the United States and Cuba.  That's cancelling a lot of flights if he wants to roll back this policy.  And I can't imagine that the U.S. airline industry is going to be particularly pleased by that kind of development.

There are thousands of Americans that have an opportunity to travel to Cuba, and they've had an opportunity to enjoy their time there, learn a little bit more about the country, enhance ties between our two countries, and they've been able to return to the United States with all of the cigars and rum that they could pack into their suitcase if they choose to.  I don’t think those Americans are going to be particularly pleased to see that policy rolled back.

Q    In that answer you failed to mention -- that long answer -- you failed to mention --

MR. EARNEST:  I'm happy to go on.  (Laughter.)  So I will.

Q    Please do.

MR. EARNEST:  I think what we also know is that the Cuban people genuinely support this policy.

Q    -- human rights.  Can you talk about that issue as it relates to the Cuban people?  Because you talk mainly about the economic benefits that will --

MR. EARNEST:  As I mentioned, I could go on.

Q    -- the Cuban government.

MR. EARNEST:  I'm happy to go on.  And I think what we have found is that for 50 years, more than 50 years, there was a policy of diplomatic isolation in place that had no material impact in improving the human rights situation in Cuba.  If anything, it got worse.  This policy has been in place for about a year.  And is there more that we would like to see the Cuban government do with regard to protecting human rights?  We absolutely would.  But our view is that the ability of the United States to advocate for those kinds of improvements is enhanced when we deepen the ties between our two countries.  When there are more Americans that are traveling to Cuba, when there is more communication going back and forth between Cuba and the United States, when there are more Cuban Americans that have an opportunity to visit family and send money to family in Cuba, all that is going to promote freedom.  That's going to promote our values.

And what we've also succeeded in doing is removing an impediment to our relationship with countries throughout Latin America that have important relationships with Cuba.  For most of the last 50 years, those countries in Latin America didn’t apply that much pressure to Cuba about their human rights situation, and were focused on the United States and our failed policy of trying to isolate them.  Now that that impediment has been removed, it's not just the United States that's encouraging the Cuban government to improve their human rights situation, but you've got countries throughout the Western Hemisphere that are making the same argument.  So all we have done is to increase pressure on the Cuban government to improve the human rights situation there, and, at the same time, the merican people have enjoyed a number of material benefits, including monetary benefits, that I do think will be persuasive to the incoming President as he determines what policy he believes is best with regard to the United States and Cuba.

Q    Do you think there has been an improvement in human rights in Cuba since the policy change?

MR. EARNEST:  Not nearly as much as we would like to see.  But the policy has been in place for a little over a year.  So let’s give it another 50 years and see where it ends up.

Goyal.

Q    Thank you, sir.  Two questions.  One, as far as U.S.-India relations are concerned, President Obama has been dealing with two Indian Prime Ministers -- Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and now Prime Minister Modi.  And he became the first U.S. President to visit India twice during his administration.  And many members of the Indian-American community will miss him, and of course, some of us will miss you.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  Wow.  Goyal is getting all sentimental here.  It's not even my last day.  Mark chooses not to associate himself with your remarks.  (Laughter.)  That's very kind of you, Goyal. Thank you.

Q    Thank you.  So the relations have been great between U.S. and India under this administration and of course, in relations to India.  My question is that what is the future of -- can you highlight some of the policies during this administration and what you think the future will be between the two countries, and what you think the new President will have for the new administration.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, President Obama has recognized the opportunity that exists with India to deepen our security, economic and diplomatic relationship.  And the President believes that doing that successfully allows the United States to advance our interest not just in Asia but around the world.  And President Obama is proud of the success that we have had in doing exactly that.

There are important economic benefits for the American people.  There obviously are important security benefits in that region of the world as two of the world’s largest democracies get together and work together to advance the interests of peace-loving countries like our two countries.

With regard to the future, that's something that the incoming administration will have to speak to.  But President Obama had an opportunity during his eight years in office to chart a course that he believes benefitted the citizens of the United States and India.

Q    And second, as far as the press relations are concerned between President-elect Trump press relations and also you think -- what advice do you think the President will have -- President Obama for President-elect as far as press relations are concerned, or what President-elect believes or might be thinking that press who are not favoring him or was against him?  And also, any advice for upcoming press secretary, Sean Spicer, who is not a new face in the White House or in this town?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I had an opportunity to meet with Mr. Spicer at the beginning of last week.  We had a nice conversation.  My colleague, Jen Psaki, who has got a lot of experience working here at the White House, spent a long time talking to him about the opportunity to work here and talked to him a little bit about the logistics of running a White House press office, but also some of the things that he can do to prepare himself to do the important work, standing behind this podium and representing the interests of not just the administration but of the country.

And both of us, in private and as I've done publicly, I wish him well and will be hoping for his success as he manages the relationship between the White House and the White House Press Corps and as he seeks to advocate for the best interests of the United States.

With regard to advice that the President has given the President-elect, as we've discussed in here a few times, the President and President-elect had an opportunity to consult on the telephone a number of times since they met in person in the Oval Office back on November 10th.  But I'm going to protect their ability to have a private conversation.

Q    One on the new relations, please?

MR. EARNEST:  Okay, last one.

Q    Yes, sir.  Thank you.  Still so many people are waiting and see that if there is a light in the dark tunnel for them under Obama administration.  What is the future of -- because many of them are living under the prospect of working under -- so what do you think is for them, what is their future?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, it's hard for me to speak to the future because there’s an incoming administration who will set their own agenda and pursue the priorities that they have identified.  But President Obama certainly recognized that there is an important opportunity for us to reform our broken immigration system.  And we did work to develop a proposal that was supported by a number of Republicans in the United States Senate that would bring people out of the shadows and prevent people from taking advantage of them because of their status, and also asking them, after undergoing a background check and paying taxes -- giving them a path to citizenship.

That is consistent with the United States of America being a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants.  That's a policy that reflects the views of a broad majority of the American public.  But we'll have to see what this Congress and the next administration chooses to pursue.

Yes, sir.

Q    My country, Canada, and yours, the United States, share common igloos in the Northern Arctic, and we've heard a word bandied about -- some very wonderful interviews by with Barack Obama -- “hope.”  What kind of hope do you have for environmental and natural habitat issues in the Arctic?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I can tell you is that President Obama and Prime Minister Trudeau have been able to work quite effectively together to safeguard some of the most beautiful places in the world in the Arctic.  Obviously both the United States and Canada are Arctic nations, and being able to work together to safeguard some of those areas is an important legacy of President Obama.  And I know that President Obama is hopeful that Prime Minister Trudeau will continue to look for ways to make efforts to protect the Arctic and fight climate change a top priority.  And I can't speak for the incoming administration, but I would expect that -- well, what I will say is that President Obama is hopeful that Prime Minister Trudeau will continue to make those issues a priority.

Q    (inaudible) -- the next administration?

MR. EARNEST:  I think it remains to --

Q    -- denying the issues of environmental changes and the things that are taking place there.  Are you --

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what we have found and certainly what President Obama has found over his eight years in office is that we can make tangible, important progress in protecting the planet by working closely with other countries.  And the United States has played a leading role in doing exactly that.

The United States brokered an agreement with China that really mobilized the international community and convinced individual countries to make their own commitments to reduce carbon pollution in a way that has had a tangible, positive impact on the diplomatic track, in terms of making commitments to reduce carbon pollution.

That's good for the country.  It's good for the planet.  It's also good for our economy, because the United States does stand at the forefront of many of the technologies that other countries we'll have to invest in, in order to keep their promises.  And so whether that's a company -- a U.S. company like Westinghouse that builds nuclear reactors, or if it's smaller American companies that are at the forefront of wind energy technology or at the forefront of solar technology or at the forefront of energy efficiency technology, countries now around the world will be turning to that kind of technology in order to meet the commitments that they have made.

So by enforcing these commitments and by continuing to lead the international community to make these commitments, President Obama has created a real economic opportunity.  And hopefully those are the kinds of policies that will be continued and the full benefits will be enjoyed.

I'll give you the last one, sir, and then we'll do the week ahead.

Q    It isn't your last day, but it is your last week.  I'd love to hear your own self-criticism, what you think you could have done better on the job; what you think we could have done better.  And finally, Chiefs and Steelers -- what’s your --

MR. EARNEST:  I thought you would never ask.  (Laughter.)  With regard to -- we'll get to that.  With regard to my own performance, I'm confident that we could spend a decent amount of time every day underscoring aspects of my presentation that could have been improved.

The one thing that I feel good about having done is I succeeded in being consistently honest.  I succeeded in understanding the President's point of view and doing my best to accurately describe it to all of you and to the American public. And I've shown a genuine interest in and respect for the role that all of you play in holding people in power accountable.  That's critical to the success of our democracy.  You all have dedicated a significant portion of your lives to doing exactly that, and I certainly hope that it continues.

With regard to assessing your performance, it's not my first day here -- I'm not going to fall into that trap.  (Laughter.)  So there is a healthy separation between the United States government and the independent media that covers us, so I'll leave it to all of you to assess your own performance and to look for ways to play your important role in our democracy even better.

With regard to --

Q    Gold, silver, or bronze -- you, Gibbs and Carney?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  I'll let you award the medals.

With regard to the football game this weekend, I'm really looking forward to it.  The Chiefs have not won a home playoff game since 1994, so to say that the Chiefs are due is an understatement.  But as I recall, that game that they won in January of 1994 was against the Steelers.  Look, what I do think is if the defense can make some stops and even slow down that potent Pittsburgh offense, then I think the Chiefs stand a good chance.

Q    -- on that regard?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't want to jinx it, but I will be watching with interest.

Q    Week ahead?

MR. EARNEST:  Let's do the week ahead.  Darlene seems as interested in the football game as I am.  (Laughter.)

On Monday, Martin Luther King Day, the President will welcome the Chicago Cubs to the White House to honor that team and their 2016 World Series victory.  Later that day, the President will participate in a service project to mark Martin Luther King Jr. Day.

On Tuesday, the President will attend meetings at the White House.

On Wednesday, the President of the United States will host his final news conference as President of the United States here in the briefing room.  It will be in the afternoon, but we'll get you a specific time next week.

Q    East Room?

MR. EARNEST:  It will be in this room.

On Thursday, the President will attend meetings at the White House.

On Friday morning, President Obama and the First Lady will welcome President-elect Trump and Melania Trump to the White House for tea and a small reception.  Then, per custom, President Obama and President-elect Trump will motorcade up to the United States Capitol together.

The President and First Lady will attend the inaugural swearing-in and inaugural address of President-elect Trump, and then depart the United States Capitol via helicopter, as other Presidents have done in recent years.  At that point, President Obama and the First Lady will proceed to Joint Base Andrews, where he will deliver remarks to a group of staff that will be gathered there to bid farewell.  And then he and Mrs. Obama will depart Joint Base Andrews on their last flight aboard the presidential aircraft to a destination to be announced.

Q    Are those staff remarks open?  Or pooled?

MR. EARNEST:  There will be some pool coverage of the President's remarks to staff at Joint Base Andrews.

Q    White House staff?

MR. EARNEST:  I think it will be both the White House staff and staff from across the administration.

Q    Are you briefing Tuesday?

MR. EARNEST:  Tuesday I will do a briefing and it will be, as you could tell from the schedule, my final briefing at the White House as well.

Q    It better be great.

MR. EARNEST:  Bring your hankies.  (Laughter.)

Q    No, you need to bring your hanky.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  I will not brief on Thursday.  On Thursday, I anticipate that will be a quiet day of packing.  (Laughter.)

Q    Are you going to miss this?

MR. EARNEST:  Absolutely.  Can't you tell?  (Laughter.)

Q    You're going to miss us.

MR. EARNEST:  I will.

Q    No, I'm serious.

MR. EARNEST:  I am -- we'll have an opportunity to talk about this on Tuesday.

Francesca, do you have the last one here?

Q    Did you say what he's doing this weekend?

MR. EARNEST:  I'm not aware that the President has a public schedule this weekend.

Have a good weekend, everybody.

END
2:23 P.M. EST
1:08 P.M. EST

MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Nice to see you all.  Hope you had a pleasant Thanksgiving holiday with your families.

Q    And you.

MR. EARNEST:  Thank you.  I do not have any comments at the top, so we can go straight to your questions.

Kevin Freking, do you want to start?

Q    Thank you, Josh.  I wanted to ask, how does the administration view Fidel Castro’s passing on the impact on normalization of relations between the U.S. and Cuba?  Does it delay, does it hasten normalization of relations with Cuba?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, at least from the U.S. standpoint, I wouldn't expect any impact on the kind of progress that we're committed to making on our end to begin to normalize relations with Cuba.

As you know, when President Obama made an announcement almost two years ago now to begin normalizing relations between our two countries, this was rooted in the President’s conclusion that a policy of isolation that the United States had pursued for more than five decades had failed to bring about the improved human rights climate that I think just about every American citizen would like to see in Cuba.  And after five decades of trying the same policy of isolation without seeing many results, the President believed it was time to try something different.

And what we have seen is greater freedom for American citizens to visit Cuba, to send money to family members in Cuba, to engage in business and seek business opportunities in Cuba.  It also enhanced the ability of the United States government to maintain an embassy in Cuba where U.S. officials can more effectively not just engage with government officials in Cuba but also those activists in civil society that are fighting for greater freedoms.

Those are all good things.  Those are all benefits that are enjoyed by Americans.  They also facilitate the kind of people-to-people ties that we believe will be more effective in bringing freedom and opportunity to the Cuban people, something that they have long sought and been denied by the Cuban government.  And after five decades of not seeing any results, the President believed it was time to see something different.

And I think it is -- we clearly haven't seen all the results that we would like to see, but we're pleased with the progress.  And it certainly has benefitted the American people in a tangible way and it continues to be strongly supported by an overwhelming majority of Cubans.  When they’re asked about their opinion of this change in our policy, it's something that was very warmly welcomed by the Cuban people.  And I think that should be a pretty good indication of the kind of success that this policy is already having.

Q    So, no on our end, but what about on their end?  With his passing, do you anticipate that they would be more receptive to making some of the changes that the U.S. is calling for as far as opening up their private sector, things along those lines?

MR. EARNEST:  Time will tell.  I'll let the Cuban government speak for the plans that they intend to pursue.  Obviously we’d welcome a hastening of the kinds of changes that we would like to see, but I'll let my Cuban counterpart speak to any plans that they may have and whether or not they’re changed by the death of Mr. Castro.

Q    Just one more question along those lines.  How does the President see -- how will history view Fidel Castro in the President’s mind?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think that he obviously is a towering figure who had a profound impact on the history of not just his country but the Western Hemisphere.  There certainly is no whitewashing the kinds of activities that he ordered and that his government presided over that go against the very values that this country -- that our country -- has long defended.

I think the question for the President is, in terms of making policy, are we going to be rooted in that past, or are we going to look to the future?  It doesn’t mean that we should ignore the past, but it does mean that we can't let the past interfere with our ability to make progress.  And I think some of the changes that we've seen on Cuba already are an indication that progress is possible.

And that's been the focus of the President’s policy direction over the last several years.  And there certainly will be ample opportunity for historians to take stock of Fidel Castro’s legacy and what it has meant for the people in his country.

Q    One last one.  Would you comment on President-elect Trump’s claims of massive voter fraud taking place in the presidential election?  Is there any truth whatsoever to what he’s saying?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, I would defer to the President-elect’s team for commentary on his tweets.  I think what I can say is an objective fact is that there has been no evidence produced to substantiate a claim like that.  But for a reaction or an explanation, I'd refer you to the President-elect’s team.

Ayesha.

Q    Thank you.  A little more on Cuba.  Can you tell us anything about what the thoughts are on an official delegation going to Castro’s funeral?  What the plans are on that, and if there’s any plans you can announce?

MR. EARNEST:  If there is a U.S. delegation that’s sent to attend the funeral we'll obviously announce that publicly in the same way that we have other official delegations.  But I don't have any information about that at this point to share.

Q    So going back -- you mentioned how you can't whitewash some of Castro’s actions.  Some lawmakers did criticize the President’s statement for not directly mentioning Castro’s human rights abuses.  Can you kind of talk about -- in the statement about his death.  Can you kind of talk about or respond to that? And also, why was that decision made to not maybe more directly address some of those concerns?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, those critics of the statement are also critics of the policy, and have been scrambling to try to justify their loyalty to an obviously failed policy of isolation that didn’t bring about any results for the Cuban people or for the American people.

I think the President’s statement quite clearly speaks for itself and it makes clear the President’s desire to look toward the future.  That's the responsibility that he has as the President of the United States and as the leader of this country, is to look out for the interests of the American people moving forward.  It was a campaign slogan of his reelection.  And that's what he’s been focused on.

And to issue some sort of blistering statement and engage in the kind of mutual recriminations that are tied to the past -- that doesn’t advance freedom or democracy on the island nation of Cuba.  It doesn’t expand economic opportunity or cultural opportunity for the American people.  It doesn’t advance further the success that we've had in removing the Cuba issue as an impediment in our relationship with countries throughout the Western Hemisphere.

The President made the observation when he was in Latin America last week about the strength and health of the relationship between the United States and countries throughout the Western Hemisphere, and Latin America in particular -- they’re as strong as they've ever been.

Some of that is because of the commitment that this administration has made to reach out to engage countries in the Western Hemisphere to advance those relationships.  But some of it is also attributable to the fact that for decades, the U.S. policy of isolating Cuba wasn’t just an irritant in the relationship between the United States and Cuba, it actually was an irritant in the relationship between the United States and other countries in the Western Hemisphere that had a relationship with Cuba.

And the consequence of that was that there wasn’t as much of a discussion about the human rights conditions in Cuba; there was an extensive discussion, though, about the wisdom of the U.S. policy of isolation toward Cuba.  Now that that has been removed, there’s been much more scrutiny of the way the Cuban government treats the Cuban people.  And it has allowed the United States to marshal international opinion and shine a brighter light on those policies in a way that has increased pressure on the Cuban government.  And I think this was on full, vivid display during the President’s trip to Cuba earlier this spring, where the Cuban leader faced direct, probing questions about the treatment of citizens in Cuba.

So I think this is all part of a strategy that is strongly supported by the Cuban people, has already yielded important benefits for the Cuban people.  It’s also yielded important benefits for the American people.

And I know that many of the President’s critics like to suggest that somehow the United States has made a bunch of concessions to the Cuban government.  That's wrong.  It’s not a concession to allow Cuban Americans to send more money to their family members who are living in Cuba.  It’s not a concession to secure the release of Alan Gross, a USAID contractor that was wrongly detained in Cuba.  It’s not a concession to open an embassy in Cuba.  It’s not a concession to start daily flights between the United States and Cuba that makes it easier for Americans to visit Cuba.  It’s not a concession to allow American cruise operators to stop in Cuba.  It’s not a concession to allow American hotel operators to sign licensing agreements with resorts in Cuba.  It’s not a concession to give American agricultural interests the opportunity to do more business in Cuba.

All of those are things that had important benefits for the American people and are strongly supported by the Cuban people.  So, again, I think it is very difficult for critics of this policy to make any sort of coherent, evidence-based argument that somehow the United States has been disadvantaged by this policy.
Based on all of the things that I’ve laid out, those all are benefits for the American people that we've all enjoyed.  And continued pursuit of this policy moving forward only stands to enhance the benefits for the Cuban people and for the American people.

Q    One more question on -- there was an attack on Ohio State this morning.  I was just wondering, has the President been briefed on that?  Do you have anything further about like the investigation of that attack?

MR. EARNEST:  The President was briefed this morning by Lisa Monaco who is his top Homeland Security Advisor.  The President asked to be updated on the investigation.  I know that local law enforcement officials have indicated that the situation in Columbus is no longer active, the site has been secured.  FBI officials in Columbus are assisting local authorities as they conduct this investigation.

But we’ll obviously defer to local law enforcement to disclose additional information about what exactly occurred there.  There’s still a lot of information to review and collect. But obviously this is a difficult situation, and our thoughts and prayers are with the people of Columbus and the community of Ohio State at this difficult time.

Q    Thank you.

MR. EARNEST:  Justin.

Q    I wanted to ask about David Petraeus.  You’ve said -- talked previously about how he had been continuing to stay in touch with administration officials to offer occasional advice.  And I'm wondering if that continues to be true, and if so, if that maybe lessens criticism that has been offered by some Democrats of his candidacy for Secretary of State in a potential Trump administration.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me say a couple things about that.  I have in the past acknowledged that there were senior U.S. officials in the Obama administration that had consulted with General Petraeus, based on his decades of service to this country and his areas of expertise.  I'm not aware that that relationship was formalized in any sort of way, so I can't really speak to the last time that he participated in a meeting with a senior U.S. official, or even the last time that he had a conversation with a senior U.S. official.

Obviously, maintaining any sort of informal outside advisory role is a lot different than being nominated to serve as Secretary of State of the United States.  But I recognize that there's a lot of speculation right now about who the President-elect will choose to serve in senior positions in his administration.  And I've spent the better part of the last two and a half years avoiding commentary on rumors about who may serve in the Obama administration, and I'm certainly not going to comment on speculation about who may serve in the Trump administration.

Q    I guess just as a guiding principle, does the President or does the administration believe that somebody who's had severe classification issues for which they've been convicted should hold senior positions in the United States government?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I think every President is going to have to decide for themselves what kind of person can best serve them and the country in senior roles in the administration.  And President Obama obviously took that responsibility very seriously and assembled a team that he's quite proud of to serve him and the country.  And the President has spoken at some length about how proud he is that there hasn’t been a major personal scandal in his administration; that the kind of people that he has chosen to serve in high-profile, influential positions in his administration have done so with a focus on the country's best interest.  And the President is quite proud of that.

Obviously, future Presidents will have to -- I think will understandably -- be measured against that high standard, but they'll eventually have to decide on their own who they believe can best serve the country and best serve them in the range of important positions.

Q    Let me guess -- you're not going to say if the President has told Donald Trump about the merits of the former presidential nominee from Massachusetts as Secretary of State?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have any -- I can't speak to what sort of advice the President may or may not have offered to the President-elect as he's weighing some of these personnel decisions.

Q    And last one on the spending bill.  The last time we did this, the issue of money for Flint got kind of punted to the lame duck session, with Republicans promising that they'd find funding for Flint within the water bill.  That seems to have somewhat stalled out on Capitol Hill right now.  Knowing that you and I could perhaps negotiate a bill more easily than Congress could --

MR. EARNEST:  Are you taking my lines now?  (Laughter.)  Is that the deal?  Is that what we're going to do here at the end?  (Laughter.)

Q    I'm just wondering if --

MR. EARNEST:  Justin, I just have one more for you.  (Laughter.)

Q    Like Jeopardy -- (laughter) --

Q    -- if funding for Flint is going to be sort of a red line for the President in the CR.

MR. EARNEST:  Obviously, the President feels quite passionately about the need for Congress to fulfill their rightful role in providing resources to the community of Flint that has been dealing with the contamination of their water supply.  This is a significant problem, and this administration has mobilized significant resources to try to respond to the urgent need of the people there.  But it's going to require congressional resources to address the longer-term infrastructure challenge that exists.  And there is a role for Congress to play. There were promises made by Republicans, and the President expects them to keep that promise.

Alexis.

Q    Josh, let me follow on an answer that you gave to Justin.  Kellyanne Conway said that President Obama and Donald Trump had a fruitful discussion on Saturday that lasted about 45 minutes.  You were just telling him that you don’t want to discuss the advice that the President is giving the President-elect, but I'm going to ask you about that.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.  You're certainly entitled to do that.

Q    Can you describe the nature of the call?  Did the President call the President-elect?  Did he want to talk about Castro's death or Cuba policy?  Did he want to talk about nominations and what his perspective might be on potential nominees?  Did he want to talk about another international situation that he thought that the President should be briefed on personally?  Can you add, embellish, rule out anything?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I can certainly confirm for you that the President did have a telephone conversation with the President-elect on Saturday.  They spoke for 45 minutes or so.  When the President-elect was in the Oval Office with President Obama 36 hours after the election results were tabulated, the President-elect indicated a desire to seek President Obama's advice and counsel repeatedly, and President Obama made clear that he stood ready to offer that advice because of his underlying, enduring commitment to a smooth and effective transition from the Obama presidency into the next.

I didn’t foresee a scenario in which we would announce when each call had taken place.  What I'm certainly going to do is protect the ability of the President-elect to confidentially seek the advice of the sitting President.  So I'm not going to be able to get into the content of the call, but I can certainly confirm for you that the call did take place, even if I'm not willing to promise that I will announce when future calls have been placed.

Q    Who called whom?

MR. EARNEST:  My understanding is the President-elect reached out to President Obama, and President Obama returned his call.

Q    And can you say whether this was the first time since they met in the Oval that they've conversed by phone?

MR. EARNEST:  I can confirm for you that it's not.  But I won't be in a position to detail all of the conversations that they've had.

Q    But can you give us an idea of how often this has happened?

MR. EARNEST:  There are a handful of times.

Q    A handful?  Five times?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think handful -- a handful is intentionally vague.  (Laughter.)

Q    Five or fewer?

MR. EARNEST:  Again, I think I said all I'm going to say.

Q    It's more than two -- but more than several?  I mean, let's have a discussion --

MR. EARNEST:  Maybe you guys can figure that out.

Q    Depends on how big the hands are.  (Laughter.)

Q    But can you add --

MR. EARNEST:  I can't.  I'll spare you.  Do you have anything else, Alexis?

Q    There is no way to add to what we were talking about with Cuba, whether Cuba was discussed between them?

MR. EARNEST:  I just am not going to get into the content of their conversation.

Chip.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  No content, but how about tone?  Were you in the room?

MR. EARNEST:  I was not.

Q    You were not.

MR. EARNEST:  I was not.

Q    Do you know anything about what the tone was?  I mean, are they like best pals when they're on the phone together?  Or is it tense?  Can you say anything about the tone and the mood of these conversations aside from the content?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think that you -- again, I'm going to protect the ability of the President-elect to consult confidentially with the President of the United States.  But I think to the extent that I am willing to characterize it, I think that's how I would do so, as a consultation.  And the President-elect indicated publicly that he intended to seek out the advice and counsel of the sitting President of the United States, and that's something that he's done a couple of times now.

Q    And Mr. Trump threatened to terminate the deal with Cuba today if Cuba is unwilling to make a better deal for the Cuban people, the Cuban-American people, and the U.S. as a whole. You've talked about it before, but, now, how worried is the President that he will terminate this deal?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I'll let the President-elect and his team speak to whatever plans they may have in store once he takes office on January 20th.  Certainly, I've spent a decent amount of time in this briefing already making a strong case about the way that the American people and the Cuban people have benefitted from the decision that President Obama made with the Cuban government to begin normalizing relations between our two countries.

So that normalization policy has brought about significant changes, including agreements to allow U.S. cruise ships to dock in Cuba.  It won't be easy to rescind that permission.  There are already licensing agreements that have been signed by at least one U.S. hotel company to begin operating facilities in Cuba.  That would be a difficult thing to unwind.

Q    Right.  But is Mr. Obama fretting over the possibility that it could all be reversed?

MR. EARNEST:  No -- again, in part, because there are up to 110 daily flights that are scheduled to occur between -- scheduled to take off from the United States and land in Cuba on a daily basis in the coming months.  In fact, today, coincidentally enough, the very first flight in several decades took off from the United States, commercial flight --

Q    And can all be stopped.

MR. EARNEST:  -- and landed in Havana.  And I don’t know how many people had purchased tickets for this flight, but this is now -- there will now be daily flights between the United States and Havana.

Q    Or not.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, unwinding that, Chip, is not as easy as just a stroke of a pen because there are significant consequences for doing that.  There will be an economic impact in the United States and in Cuba for unraveling that policy.

Again, those who are the harshest critics, particularly those in Congress who are the harshest critics of the President's policy say that part of their concern is for the plight of the Cuban people.  Well, first of all, the Cuban people overwhelmingly support this policy.  According to some polls that I've seen, more than 90 percent of the Cuban people support this policy.

The second is that when Americans travel to Cuba, in some cases they're staying in properties that are advertised on Airbnb.  Some 50,000 Americans in just the last 18 or 19 months have availed themselves of this opportunity.  They're spending about $250, on average, per stay, and that's money that benefits the Cuban people, to say nothing of the cab drivers and the restauranteurs who benefit from this increased travel, as well.

So, again, to cancel all of that would deal a significant economic blow to those Cuban citizens.  So I think it's very hard for critics of this policy to reconcile their opposition to this policy and their claimed desire to advance the interests of the Cuban people, because the truth is this policy does advance the interests of the Cuban people.  So to take it away does not achieve the goal that they claim to have in mind.

Ron.

Q    What about dissidents and the opposition to Cuba?  Have they benefitted at all from this policy change?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, they certainly -- I can tell you one way that they benefitted.  Some of them got a meeting with the President of the United States when he traveled to Cuba in March.
Q    And has the Cuban government done anything positive, tangible in the name of human rights that you can tell us about?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, if the critics of this policy want to say that their desire is to lift up the cause of the Cuban people, I don’t know what better way you could do that than to invite them to the United States embassy and have an in-person meeting with the President of the United States to talk about their efforts to fight for freedom and liberty in the island nation of Cuba.  That certainly is a pretty profound statement and lifts up in an important way the cause of justice that they seek.

So, listen, I'll refer you to the Cuban government to discuss what kinds of steps they’ve taken to better protect and acknowledge the human rights of those who may have political disagreements with the government.  What I can tell you is that the policy that we have pursued in terms of policymaking and in terms of the President's travel has succeeded in giving more attention and shining a spotlight on the cause of those Cubans who are putting themselves at grave risk to fight for the freedom and liberty of the Cuban people.

Q    So just as the bottom line, is the President satisfied with what the Cuban government has done on human rights and is doing now on human rights, or not?
MR. EARNEST:  Ron, there is no doubt that we would like to see the Cuban government do more, but this policy has not even been in place for two years.  But we certainly have enjoyed more benefits than was enjoyed under the previous policy that was in place for more than 50 years and didn’t bring about the kinds of benefits or the kinds of progress that we would like to see.

So, again, I think it is hard for critics of this policy to somehow make the case that they're looking out for the interests of the Cuban people, because the interests of the Cuban people were not advanced by a policy of isolation that for more than 50 years affected the U.S. relationship with Cuba, but also affected our relationship with countries throughout the Western Hemisphere, and not for the better.

Q    Is there evidence that the Cuban people, and not the Cuban government, have benefitted economically from this?  You talk about cab drivers and so on and so forth, but is there really hard evidence that somehow the behavior of the government is changing, not just in terms of its treatment of dissidents, but in terms of how the economy functions?  The critics of this policy say that there’s no evidence.  Critics say that, in fact, the government is the one who’s benefitting, not the Cuban people, generally.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, we can certainly provide you some additional evidence about the economic benefits that are enjoyed by the Cuban people.  What I can tell you is that those Cuban citizens that do work in industries, like cab drivers or working in restaurants, even Airbnb owners, are benefitting from the enhanced economic activity between Cuban citizens and American citizens who are visiting Cuba.  They are paid at a higher rate, and they're enjoying more economic activity than they otherwise would because of this policy to normalize relations with Cuba.

So we can follow up with you on some more specific data here.  But what is clear is that there is a growing entrepreneurial sector inside of Cuba that is benefitting from greater engagement with the United States.  That's a good thing, and that is a benefit that is enjoyed by the Cuban people directly.

Q    On the conversations between the President and President-elect, is there -- I know you can't talk about specifics, but -- maybe you will change your mind -- but does the President -- what benefit does the President see coming from these handful of conversations?  Is there something specific?  I know the idea is to have a smooth transition, but is there anything specific that has been produced by these conversations that the President can say is a positive development, something that he has gotten out of this from the President-elect?

MR. EARNEST:  I'm just not going to be able to go into the details of their conversation to try to illustrate that kind of consequence or benefit.  I think what I can say in general is that President Obama has been doing this job for almost eight years now and he’s learned a lot about the kinds of challenges that every President faces.  These are the kinds of challenges that are difficult to assess until you're actually sitting in that chair in the Oval Office.  This is something the President talked about a lot on the campaign trail.  This is a particularly significant challenge for someone who has never held elective office before.

Q    So what were some of these specific challenges that he’s perhaps been able to illuminate?

MR. EARNEST:  Again, I’m just not going to get into the details of their -- or the content of their conversation.

Q    What about the recounts in Michigan and Wisconsin?  What’s the President’s thinking about that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President has talked a lot in the almost three weeks before the election -- or since the election  -- about his institutional responsibilities as President.  And those institutional responsibilities require him to focus on a smooth and effective transition to the next presidency, regardless of the partisan affiliation of the next President and regardless of whether or not the President endorsed the incoming President.  Clearly he did not.  But the President is determined to put his institutional responsibilities as the President of the United States ahead of his own personal feelings and ahead of his own political preferences.

The point of all this is that state election officials also have an institutional responsibility, and they have a responsibility to follow the election law in their state.  And the election law in each state varies as it relates to when a recount can occur, how a recount should be conducted, what time frame in which a recount should be conducted, who bears the financial responsibility of paying for a recount.  And the President’s expectation is that state and local election administrators all across the country will fulfill their basic institutional responsibilities.  And so far, at least in Wisconsin, we’re seeing that election officials are doing that.

Q    Is the White House and the Justice Department in any way involved in these recounts?

MR. EARNEST:  The White House certainly isn't.  I'm not aware of any Justice Department involvement, but you should check with them to confirm that.

Q    And I think you were asked earlier about the allegations by the President-elect about voter fraud.  Is the Justice Department looking into that at all?

MR. EARNEST:  You’d have to check with them about that.  But as I said before, it's just an objective fact that there’s been no evidence marshalled to substantiate that kind of claim.

Q    Just finally on the recount thing.  I hear you saying that the law needs to be followed.  So the President doesn’t have a view as to whether this is a positive development or a negative development that the Green Party and the Clinton campaign in some way would be involved in pursuing this?

MR. EARNEST:  The President’s expectation is that everybody would fulfill their institutional responsibilities.  And certainly election administrators at the state and local level in states like Wisconsin and Michigan have a very clear set of rules and responsibilities that they should follow.  And the President’s expectation is that’s what they should do.

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  I want to ask you about something Senator Rubio said about the passing of Fidel Castro.  He said he was a ruthless dictator who executed thousands of opponents and imprisoned tens of thousands.  Does the President, and more broadly, does the White House believe that Fidel Castro was, indeed, a murderer?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, there certainly is no denying the kind of violence that occurred in Cuba under the watch of the Castro regime.  There has been no effort to whitewash the history, either the history between the United States and Cuba or the history of what transpired in Cuba while Mr. Castro was leading the country.  What we have --

Q    Then what’s the problem in saying that?

MR. EARNEST:  I think I just did.

Q    No, I'm sorry, I meant in the statement in particular, it seemed that the President -- he wasn’t denying necessarily -- I thought he was very careful.  And I think there are a number of people, in particular in south Florida, who felt like he could have been much more direct and stronger in saying that this is a person who killed his citizens, who led the destruction of their economy, and they would argue, took the lives and the livelihoods of tens of thousands of his countrymen.  And yet the statement the President issued didn’t really broach that subject.  And I'm just curious why.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think there’s a couple of things, Kevin.  The first is there certainly has been no attempt on the part of this administration, either during President Obama’s trip to Cuba earlier this spring or in the aftermath of Fidel Castro’s death, to obscure or whitewash the history of the Cuban people under the Castro regime when Fidel Castro was leading that country.

I think what we have sought to avoid -- what I know we have sought to avoid -- is the downward spiral of mutual recriminations between the United States and Cuba.  What President Obama is focused on is not whitewashing the past, but actually acknowledging the past but also looking to the future and focusing on what we can do to advance the shared interests of our two countries and the people who live in our two countries.

And the President believes that the most effective way for us to do that is to actually begin to move past that painful history and actually focus on what kinds of opportunities we can pursue now that will advance the plight of the Cuban people right now.  And that's why normalizing relations between our two countries, enhancing people-to-people ties, enhancing economic ties between the United States and Cuba can ensure that there is more opportunity for the American people, but also so that there’s more opportunity and more liberty and more freedom for the Cuban people, both economically, but also, hopefully in the future, politically.

Q    Wouldn't it have made a really powerful statement to just absolutely say this is what evil looks like, and while we don't condone the past or while we're not acknowledging this person for anything beyond what he is or was, we do have a hopeful view of the future?  It just looked like -- we talked a bit about the future; we were very benign in talking about this murderer’s past from a person that seemed to be celebrated in a number of circles -- not saying the White House did -- but I'm just curious why the President felt so strongly to not really drill down on the fact that this person killed so many and I think should be seen as that person.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, we got a lot of the same kinds of questions in the context of the President’s visit to Cuba.

Q    Right.

MR. EARNEST:  And, again, I think the answer is just the same, which is that there’s no denying what happened in the past; there’s just a desire to try to advance the interest of the Cuban people and the American people by focusing on the future.  And the President has put in place the kind of policy that over the course of two years has deepened and strengthened people-to-people and economic ties between our two countries in a way that we think will have positive, long-term benefits for the Cuban people.

That's why upwards of 90 percent of the Cuban people actually support this policy and they welcome the greater engagement with the United States.  They welcome the increased remittances that are provided Cuban-Americans to family members in Cuba.  They welcome the increase in travel by American citizens to Cuba.  There’s a lot to offer.  And the Cuban people certainly benefit from that kind of greater engagement.  And that's why the President has pursued this policy.  And again, this policy hasn’t even been in place for two years, but the President certainly believes it's showing a lot more promise than the failed policy that was in place for nearly six decades.

Q    Let me ask you about Pearl Harbor Day coming up December 7th, the 75th anniversary of that fateful day.  Is there any reason why the President wouldn't consider it important that he be there, be in Hawaii, to mark the occasion, in particular given his trip in previous months to Japan that, of course, many of us in this room accompanied him?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I am confident that President Obama will mark that fateful anniversary.  And obviously there’s a generation of Americans whose lives were transformed by that day that will live in infamy.  In fact, the history of our country and the history of the world was changed by that day.

On that day, thousands of American lives were lost.  These were some of the bravest Americans that our country had to offer who had volunteered to serve our country in the United States Navy.  And so I’m confident the President will mark that day.  And it obviously is consistent with the way that he has marked previous anniversaries.

The President had the opportunity two years ago to visit Normandy, the site of D-Day, where -- that was the site of the U.S. invasion with our allies that liberated a continent and also was a place that has been the site of remarkable sacrifice by the Greatest Generation of Americans.  And the President has paid tribute on two different occasions over the course of his presidency to those Americans.  The President has visited the site of the USS Arizona Memorial in the past, on a previous visit to Hawaii.  But I’m confident the President will mark the day this year.

Q    Lastly, I want to ask you about presidential pardons.  What’s the timeframe, what’s the timetable like on something like that?  Is that something that happens January 19th?  Is that something that will happen on his way out the door on the 20th?  How does that work out?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, the President had an opportunity to talk about this a little bit back in August when your colleague Gregory asked him about this at the Pentagon.  And the President indicated that there is a process in place to evaluate clemency petitions that have been put forward.  And the President has granted clemency to hundreds of Americans who have sought a commutation of their sentence.  And this is part of what the President believes is an effort to chip away at some of the injustice that exists in our criminal justice system.

It’s not a substitute for more wide-ranging criminal justice reform that unfortunately does not look like it’s going to happen before the end of the year.  But when it comes to pardons, they’ll be carefully considered in the context of the same kind of process, and they’ll be announced when the President has made a decision.  I don't have a timeframe to provide at this point.

Anita.

Q    I just wanted to follow up on a question you got about Cuba.  You said it wasn’t -- it’s not so easy to change the Cuba policy.  This is referring to the President-elect’s tweet this morning that he might terminate the deal.

Besides the economic impact that you're saying is already happening, why is it not so easy?  I mean, lot of reporting has been done in the last couple days, actually, that it is pretty easy to do that.  So is it just the economic impact?  Or is there something else you're referring to?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, let’s just take the example of flights.  There will soon be 110 daily scheduled commercial flights between the United States and Cuba.  Clearly, a variety of U.S. airlines have invested significant money in infrastructure both in Cuba and the United States to facilitate those flights.  Many Americans signed up for tickets to board those aircraft before they depart.  There are large companies in the United States -- cruise operators and hotel operators -- that have invested significant sums of money in investing in infrastructure and doing other work to do business down in Cuba.  So unrolling all of that is much more complicated than just the stroke of a pen.

What’s also true is the American people clearly like the opportunity that they have now to more easily travel to Cuba.  They like the opportunity that they have now to bring Cuban cigars and Cuban rum home with them for their personal enjoyment.  And based on the strong support that exists on the island nation of Cuba for this policy, it’s hard to explain why you would roll it back if you say that your interest is advancing the interests of the Cuban people.

Clearly the Cuban people don't agree that rolling it back advances their interests.  So that's going to require at least some explanation, if that's the path that the President-elect chooses.  But he’ll obviously have an opportunity to make his case to the American people.

And I left out another good example, which is part of this normalization was making it easier for Cuban Americans to send money home to their family members in Cuba.  Telling Cuban Americans -- who in some cases are actually the base of your political support -- that they can't send as much money to their own family members in Cuba who desperately need it, that they can't send money to their family members who are, in some cases, using that money to start a business and to engage in exactly the kind of entrepreneurship that we're hoping to facilitate on the island nation of Cuba.

Again, I think it’s hard to explain or justify why that's a policy that anyone would pursue, particularly if that's a policy that some of your strongest supporters benefit from.  But again, the incoming President -- because of the executive authority that he wields -- will have an opportunity to make this decision.  But the complications are large.

And the fact is this policy is one that -- it has not just been implemented by the U.S. government.  It’s actually a policy that’s been implemented by the American people and by U.S. businesses that have sought to take advantage of some of these opportunities and develop commercial relationships.

There are significant agricultural interests in the United States that long for the opportunity to expand their commercial operations in Cuba.  So explaining to them that they're going to have roll back those plans -- even if they've committed significant sums of money to invest in those plans -- again, I think is one that may be hard to explain.

Michelle.

Q    It sounds like you have a lot of doubts that much will change then, even though -- I mean, what you hear from analysts is that they expect at the very least a change in trajectory, is how some are saying it, coming from the new administration and the new Congress.  But you seem to --

MR. EARNEST:  You're just talking about specifically on the Cuba policy, or you're talking about more generally?

Q    On Cuba policy.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.

Q    So -- but you seem to cast doubt on there being much change there.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think for all of the reasons that I have laid out, the prospects of scrapping the deal are rather remote if for no other reason than it would be extraordinarily complicated and costly to do so.  It also is difficult to explain if you claim that you have the best interest of the Cuban people in mind, but an overwhelming majority of Cuban citizens actually supports the policy.

So again, all of that is very difficult to reconcile.  And I think this goes to actually something that the President talked about quite a bit on his recent overseas trip, which is that there is a difference between making pronouncements as a candidate for office and actually doing the difficult work of governing, as the President described it.  Sometimes, all too often, reality intrudes.  I think this in some ways is as good an example as any.

Q    Even though -- I mean, one of the names we just saw as part of the State Department’s landing team is somebody who is pretty hardline, anti-Castro and against normalization.  So if those are the initial people who are going there to make that transition, you still feel pretty confident that there’s not going to be much change, or a change in trajectory, as some analysts are seeing it?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I don't think I’m going to be in a position of predicting the future.  I think what I’m merely highlighting and trying to underscore here in as much detail as possible is that it’s just not as simple as one tweet might make it seem.  And again, that's just an objective fact when you consider how the American people and U.S. businesses have implemented this deal in a way that has provided significant benefits to the American people and provided significant benefits to the Cuban people.

Again, the U.S. relationship with countries throughout the Western Hemisphere, particularly in Latin American, is as strong as it’s been in generations.  And all of that would be undone by the reinstitution of a policy that had failed after having been in place for more than five decades.

So there are significant diplomatic, economic, cultural costs that will have to be accounted for if this policy is rolled back.  But this is among the many significant challenges that the incoming administration will have to carefully consider.

Q    And speaking of that, why would you be vague on the number of conversations they've had?  Why would that be something you wouldn’t want to share?

MR. EARNEST:  Again, because I’m just going to protect the ability of the President and the President-elect to engage in confidential consultations.  So I think that's simply it.  The President-elect indicated his intent to seek the advice and counsel of the President of the United States, and that's something that he’s done on a number of occasions.

Q    Is that something that President Obama did with outgoing President Bush?  Did President Obama call him a number of times to have discussions?

MR. EARNEST:  No, I’m not aware that that occurred.  I can't detail all of the conversations that occurred between President-elect Obama and then-President George W. Bush.  But I’m not aware of the kinds of telephone consultations that have occurred in the context of this transition.

Q    Okay, so this is President Obama helping out somebody that he said was unfit for office not that long ago, and said all kinds of things about on the campaign trail.  So given that they've had these conversations, does the President have more confidence in the ability of Donald Trump to run the country?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware that the President has changed his assessment.  But I can tell you that the President is committed to living up to the responsibility that he has as the President of the United States to put the interest of the country ahead of his own political preferences.

And the President didn't support President-elect Trump in the race.  In fact, he endorsed his opponent and campaigned aggressively for his opponent.  But the votes were cast, and they were counted.  And within 36 hours, President-elect Trump was sitting in the Oval Office next to President Obama in a meeting that lasted 90 minutes that ended with a public statement by the President-elect indicating that he hoped to have many future conversations with President Obama.

And that is a very good illustration of President Obama’s deep commitment -- despite their strong political differences -- to facilitating the kind of smooth and effective transition that will give the incoming President the best opportunity to succeed in uniting the country and in moving our country forward.

Q    So a few weeks ago, before all of these lengthy phone conversations took place, you and the administration stood by the things that President Obama had said on the campaign trail.  Now, after those conversations, do you still stand by those?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware that the President’s assessment has changed.  But the election is over, and the President is focused on his institutional responsibilities as President of the United States to preside over a smooth and effective transition to the next administration -- even though the next President is not one that he has supported politically.

Q    And even though you say the election is over, there are many people who feel that the election is not over.  And the recount efforts have also been called far-fetched and frivolous.  During the campaign, the President many, many times expressed his confidence in the integrity of the electoral system, his doubts that there could be hacking, or widespread illegality of voting or anything like that.  So that doesn't sound like the stance that would support a recount.

Given those things that he said about integrity and how the system is run, does he feel like these efforts might be too much, or over the top?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, the President does have confidence in the way that the election system in this country is run.  And part of what is required of any election system is providing for a recount when the law stipulates that one can be requested.  And the President’s expectation is that, consistent with the smooth functioning of our election system on Election Day, is ensuring that the recount system functions smoothly, according to the law, when justified by a narrow victory by one side or the other.  And the President’s expectation is that everybody will follow the rules and regulations, and that this recount will occur on a timeframe envisioned by the law.

Q    Before the election, the President criticized Donald Trump’s -- what was interpreted as foreshadowing that the election would be contested, or there would be calls for recounts, and now that is happening on the part of Democrats.  Does that seem like the tables have just turned and it’s kind of the same principle?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think it’s -- I’m not sure it’s the same principle because I think there is a difference between unfounded claims of fraud and a conscientious interpretation of the recount law that is consistent with the rules that Democrats and Republicans alike apply in a situation where there’s a narrow victory by one candidate or the other.

Q    Thanks.

MR. EARNEST:  Bob.

Q    Hey, Josh.  Maybe you can answer this:  Was the President-elect’s phone call to the President -- and I believe it was on Saturday --

MR. EARNEST:  It was on Saturday.

Q    -- was that prompted by the death of Fidel Castro?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware that it was, no.

Q    Nice try.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  It was a good shot, though.

Q    Excellent try.

MR. EARNEST:  Lana.

Q    No, no, no, I’m not finished.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.  (Laughter.)

Q    I have a follow-up.

MR. EARNEST:  I’m sorry.  I thought that blowing kisses to the audience was an indication -- (laughter) -- some sort of universal symbol that I’m done asking questions.  My mistake.

Q    In truth, is the death of Fidel Castro almost irrelevant in some ways to the trajectory of how things are going at the moment right now?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, that's a provocative question primarily because we're talking about a figure in Cuban history that had a profound impact on the history of his island nation and on his nation’s relationship with the United States.  And obviously some of that -- at least some of that impact includes a treatment of citizens that's inconsistent with the kinds of rights and norms and values that we go to great lengths to protect in this country.

But what I can say -- and the observation I made earlier -- is I’m not aware that the United States is going to do anything differently in pursuit of our normalization policy today that we weren’t doing the day before Fidel Castro's death.

I can't speak to what sort of impact this may have on the way that the Cuban government will pursue this policy.  Obviously, it was a joint agreement between the United States government and the Cuban government to pursue this normalization policy, so you’d have to talk to them about whether or not they would make any changes based on their trajectory after the death of Fidel Castro.

Lana.

Q    The Hill is reporting that President Obama encouraged Hillary Clinton to concede the election.  Can you confirm if the President called her prior to her call to Mr. Trump?

MR. EARNEST:  I saw that report.  I can tell you that President Obama did have a conversation with Secretary Clinton on Election Night.  I’m not going to get into the content of their conversation either.  I think the one observation that I would make is that Secretary Clinton, after having spent more than a year waging a tireless campaign across the country for the presidency, is going to make her own decision about whether or not she’s prepared to concede the election.

And I suspect, though I haven’t spoken to anyone on her staff, that she would take some umbrage at the suggestion that anybody is going to dictate to her how she should handle that situation.  And I think the way that she did handle it -- particularly in the statement that she delivered the morning after the election that was characterized by so much grace and poise and statesmanship, that was obviously a very difficult time for her given the surprising outcome -- is a testament to her character and her leadership, and I think is a testament to the fact that she handled this situation based on what she believed was right, and based on what she believed was in the best interest of the country.

And I think there’s ample public evidence to indicate that that's how -- that that's what she was motivated by.  And I think that, frankly, is what has drawn her so many compliments, even by people who didn't support her politically.

Q    So just to be crystal clear, you dispute the characterization of The Hill article, but not the facts?

MR. EARNEST:  I think what I will say is I don't have anything to add to characterize the content of the telephone conversation.  I can tell you that the President did call Secretary Clinton on Election Night, but I can't shed any light on the content of their conversation.  I can just tell you that when I was reading the story, my reaction was that in a situation like that, nobody is going to tell Secretary Clinton what to do.  She’s going to decide what to do.  And what she decided to do was to put the interest of the country first, even at a very, very difficult time for her personally.

Q    Is Ambassador Caroline Kennedy being considered to represent the United States at Fidel Castro’s funeral?  And if so, what message would that send about America’s past and future relationship with Cuba?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't have any news to make on the U.S. delegation to Mr. Castro’s funeral.  I can't even confirm that there will be one at this point.  But if there is one, we’ll certainly announce who will lead it and who will participate in it.  And we can talk about it then.

Q    When do you expect to make a decision or have something to announce?

MR. EARNEST:  My understanding is that the funeral is tomorrow, so we have to --

Q    I know -- that's why I’m wondering what's your timeline, Josh.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  So soon.  (Laughter.)

Q    And then finally, you said to Michelle twice you're not aware that the President has changed his assessment regarding Mr. Trump.  But we've also heard from Mr. Trump that, with the interactions that he’s had with President Obama, that he’s come to change his opinion.  He thinks more fondly of him.  He likes him more than he thought he would.  So you're saying that that's not reciprocated by the President?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think mostly what I was referring to is the rhetoric and argument that the President was making in advance of the election in support of Secretary Clinton and raising concerns about Mr. Trump’s campaign.  And the observation that I have made is that the President’s mind hasn’t changed, but his responsibilities have because an election has occurred, and the American people have decided that President-elect Trump should succeed President Obama.

And the President’s institutional responsibilities to ensure a smooth and effective transition supersede any specific political preference that he has, even on something as significant as the presidency of the United States.

For his personal feelings in terms of -- or his assessment of the personal relationship that he has with President-elect Trump, to be honest with you, I haven’t really talked to him about that.  But maybe one of you will have an opportunity to ask him about that at some point in the future.

Francesca.

Q    Is it safe to say that the President won’t be attending Castro’s funeral given the timing and everything you’ve said today?

MR. EARNEST:  That is correct.  The President will not be traveling to attend the funeral of Fidel Castro.

Q    Okay, thank you.  Will the Vice President possibly be attending?  Is that -- but realistically, will the Vice President possibly be attending?  And would the Secretary of State possibly attend at this point?

MR. EARNEST:  So just to avoid all of the --

Q    Just all the --

MR. EARNEST:  So I can confirm for you that neither the President nor Vice President will attend.  I don't want to lead you to conclude that the Secretary of State is considering attending.  What I’d want to lead you to conclude is that we’ll have an announcement as soon as we can get one out about a delegation, if there is one.  I will keep you posted.

Q    Sorry, to clarify the last part where you're saying you don't want to lead me to conclude that the Secretary of State would be attending --

MR. EARNEST:  Yes.

Q    -- you're also saying then that the Secretary of State, John Kerry, is not planning to attend, as well?

MR. EARNEST:  Stay tuned for the release.

Gardiner.

Q    Aleppo looks like it will fall fairly soon, and fall to the government of Bashar al-Assad.  Do you have any further reaction to this impending disaster, which looks like it will happen in the coming several days?

MR. EARNEST:  The Obama administration, including the President himself, continues to be profoundly disturbed at the violence that is being used against innocent Syrians in Aleppo.  This is violence that is organized and executed by the Assad government with the willing support of the Russians and the Iranians.

And the situation is just heartbreaking.  I saw a report earlier today that the latest estimate is that there are hundreds of thousands of children in besieged locations in Syria.  That's difficult to comprehend.  And it’s tragic.  And there’s no positive spin to put on a situation like that.

What I can tell you is that the United States continues to work diplomatically to try to bring the violence to an end and to try to provide for routine and continuous humanitarian aid deliveries.  But a solution that looks like that has remained frustratingly out of reach.

It doesn't mean the United States has stopped trying.  If anything, we have seen Secretary of State John Kerry redouble his efforts to try to bring about that kind of solution, because we know that it’s just impossible to impose a military solution on a situation like this.  And, unfortunately, a diplomatic solution has been very difficult to find, as well.

Richard.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  You insisted on the fact that it would be complicated the cost to scrap the Cuban deal.  Would you say it's exactly the same and worse to scrap the NAFTA agreement?  Like, it’s not comparable?   It's just recent there was a presidential decree, and the other one is like a treaty.  It would seem it’s just a complicated to get rid of.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think a trade agreement is a little bit different than the broader diplomatic normalizing of relations between our two countries.  So rather than try to compare them, why don't we just talk about the NAFTA agreement.

What is true is that President Obama actually did engage in an effort to try to strengthen and improve the NAFTA agreement by negotiating a Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement that included Canada and Mexico and included enforceable higher labor and environmental standards.  This is the chief complaint about NAFTA is that the higher labor standards that were contemplated in the NAFTA agreement were not central to the agreement and were not enforceable.

So what President Obama said is basically that he was going to make good on his promise to renegotiate NAFTA.  That's what we did.  And he put in place an agreement that would better serve American workers, American businesses, and the American economy.
Unfortunately, Republicans in Congress and Democrats in Congress have not acted to ratify that agreement even though most of the rest of the world has.  And that is going to have pretty significant strategic consequences for the United States in the Asia Pacific region.  It’s going to put us at a disadvantage in that region of the world, both strategically and economically.  But it also exists as a missed opportunity for improvements to be built into the NAFTA agreement.

Now, the prospect of trying to withdraw from the NAFTA agreement will also be extraordinarily complicated.  There are decades of economic and commercial ties among Mexican, American, and Canadian companies.  And unraveling all of that will have profound economic consequences for the United States, both in terms of jobs that are created, but also in terms of the affordability of products that are available for sale to American consumers.

So this will be -- fashioning a trade policy that advances the best interests of American businesses and American workers and American consumers is a challenging one, and one that this administration spent years focused on in the context of the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement.  And this is an agreement that was going to cut taxes on 18,000 American goods that were imposed by other countries, and this is an agreement that would for the first time have codified the kind of intellectual property protections that would serve as strong protection for American entrepreneurs and Americans businesses, including those ideas that have created a lot of jobs.

So this will certainly be another challenge -- I guess, this would be the one area where I would acknowledge that there’s an apt comparison between the Cuba policy and the NAFTA agreement -- which is, it’s easy to say that you’re going to tear up NAFTA, but the way that reality intrudes on the consequences of that decision make it more difficult to achieve than it might originally appear.

Dave.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  The Heritage Foundation has come out with its new assessment of U.S. military strength, and it says that, basically, the U.S. military is only two-thirds of the size that it should be.  What’s your reaction to that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, David, I think the President had a rather colorful exchange about this with the Republican candidate for President during one of the debates in 2012 in which then-candidate Governor Romney cited a similar analysis, and President Obama pointed out that there are also fewer horses and bayonets in the U.S. military than there used to be.  And it’s an indication of the kind of advances in technology that allow the United States to maintain, by far, the strongest military in the world.

And that military would be stronger if Republicans in Congress were not blocking the kind of spending reforms that our leaders in the Pentagon say that we need.  These are spending reforms that would strengthen the military and save taxpayers money.  But that kind of common-sense approach is one that has been opposed by Republicans in Congress, including those who claim that they oppose pork-barrel spending.  That’s rather unfortunate.

So, Dave, I think there are steps that President Obama believes would make our military stronger, but they’re being blocked by Republicans in Congress right now.  But the fact of the matter is, the United States military is the finest, strongest, most powerful military fighting force that the world has ever known, and is certainly more powerful and effective than any other military that is fielded by any other country in the world right now.

Q    Donald Trump has relied on this group’s assessment during the campaign about military strength.  Is the President concerned that Trump will embark on a military build-up next year, in light of the President viewing that the drawdown from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan should provide the government with more money to devote to other programs?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, these will all be questions that the President-elect will have to decide.  After all, he won’t just be the President of the United States, he’ll also be the Commander-in-Chief.  And President Obama has benefitted enormously from the wisdom and advice that he has received from the civilian and military leadership at the Department of Defense.  He has listened carefully to that advice.  He hasn’t followed it at every turn, but it certainly has influenced his thinking, and he certainly believes that the incoming President-elect would benefit from keeping an open mind about that advice in the same way that President Obama did.

Cheryl, I’ll give you that last one.

Q    Thanks.  Speaking of spending, this morning Senator Lankford released his annual report, finding $247 billion in wasteful and inefficient federal spending.  It’s his waste, fraud and abuse report.  Do you believe that there is $247 billion in wasteful spending in the government?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t seen his report.  I can tell you, as I alluded to with Dave, there are at least tens of billions, if not hundreds of billions, of dollars in reforms that the United States Department of Defense would implement if it weren’t for Republicans in Congress who are making much more narrow decisions based on their own political self-interest.

So there certainly are significant reforms that could be made that would make our country safer, would make our military stronger, and would save taxpayers money.  And they’re not moving forward only because of Republicans who are more focused on politics than our national security.

So I can’t speak more broadly to Senator Lankford’s report, but I can certainly tell you that we hope that Congress, maybe under a Republican President, they’ll be more persuaded by the kinds of needed reforms that President Obama has long supported.

Thanks, everybody.  We’ll see you tomorrow.

END
2:21 P.M. EST
1:16 P.M. EDT

     MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  It's been a while since we've met in this venue, so it's nice to get together again.  I think this briefing is going to go a little different than we all anticipated it would 24 hours ago, but I'll certainly do my best to answer the many questions you may have in the aftermath of the election.

     Let me just say a couple of things at the top -- three things, I should say.  The first is I think the President and the tone and the priorities that he exhibited in the Rose Garden are indicative of the approach that the White House staff is taking to ensuring a smooth transition and working to ensure the success of the President-elect in leading and uniting the country.

     The second thing is the results of the election are not even 12 hours old, and I think it is far too early -- at least for me -- to discern exactly what message the voters were trying to send last night.  There certainly is a lot of speculation about what that may have been.  Most of that speculation emanates from people who predicted a very different result last night.  So that's the essence of punditry -- nothing wrong with that.  But it is why I think it's going to require more than 12 hours of consideration and investigation to get to the bottom of what was actually motivating so many people who cast votes at the polls yesterday.

     The last thing is there are a lot of question that are, of course, raised about what impact the outcome of the election will have on the policies that this administration has prioritized over the last eight years.  And I think it's going to be a difficult -- again, less than 12 hours after the outcome of the election is known it's difficult to offer a lot of precision in answering those questions today, but certainly in the weeks and months ahead, over the course of this transition, we may get some greater insight into that.

     But so with those two cautions at the top, let me do my best to answer your questions today.

     Darlene, do you want to go first?

     Q    In all the campaigning that we've seen the President do for Hillary Clinton over the last couple of months, he talked a lot about her being the one to carry on -- to continue the progress that he achieved.  And she often talked about being the one wanting to continue that progress.  Despite what you said at the top, does the President feel in any way that the results of last night were some sort of a rejection of Hillary, but not only a rejection of her but also of him, since the two of them were so closely bound together during the campaign?

     MR. EARNEST:  I think that's an entirely fair question to ask, and I think it's an important question to answer.  I don't know that anybody has the direct answer to that question now because there are some relevant facts.  The first is that Secretary Clinton won the popular vote.  Now, winning the popular vote is not what gets you the keys to the Oval Office.  You got to win the electoral vote.  And I think everybody -- I know that everybody knew the rules going into the contest.  But it does underscore the depth of support and enthusiasm for her message and for her campaign.  And that is a testament to her leadership and her ability to build support for a national campaign.

     The other thing that happens to be true is there are a lot of people -- again, the math requires this -- who voted for Barack Obama in 2008, who voted for his reelection in 2012, and voted for Donald Trump in 2016.  And I think it's -- I don't have an explanation for that, to put it bluntly.  But I think certainly all of your networks and all of you are going to spend some time pondering that question, spend some time looking at the returns, looking at the exit polls, and maybe even spending some time in some of those communities across the country where Mr. Trump -- President-elect Trump enjoyed such strong support -- support that exceeded the expectations of everybody -- apparently, even exceeded the expectations of the Trump campaign.

     So that's a worthy question, but I'm not going to pretend I have a real direct answer for you.  But it's one that's worthy of careful consideration.

     Q    Another thing that we heard him say while out on the campaign trail is that progress was on the ballot and that if Hillary wasn’t elected all of that progress would go out the window, down the drain, would be lost.  What does the outcome last night do for the legacy the President wants to leave behind -- from Obamacare to the Iran nuclear deal, to putting a third Supreme Court justice -- a justice on the Supreme Court, and more?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, Darlene, just with the caution that we're 12 hours -- less than 12 hours away from this election being decided, there are some things that we knew to be true before the results started being tallied.  And one of those things was that the next President -- whether it was Secretary Clinton or Mr. Trump -- was going to have some difficult challenges and some difficult questions to answer with regard to a range of policies.

     We know that our economy is facing some pretty intense headwinds from overseas.  What's the kind of approach that the next President will take to ensuring that our economy can strengthen and navigate those headwinds in a way that benefits the American middle class and not just those at the top?  That's a difficult challenge that any President would have to face, and certainly President-elect Trump will have to determine the best path for confronting that.

Either President would inherit a country that has some deep and passionate political differences.  And what will President-elect Trump do to unite the country?  It won't be easy.  We know that's for sure.  We do know that he can count on the support of President Obama and Secretary Clinton, both who in the last couple of hours have pledged their support to him as he works to do that.

     Either President -- either Secretary Clinton or Mr. Trump -- would have faced a deeply divided Congress that appears totally dysfunctional, or at least it has appeared totally dysfunctional in the last two years.  And it's difficult to know -- it's difficult to see how that's going to change.  And they'll have to navigate -- President-elect Trump and his team will have to figure out how to navigate that situation.  And it won't be easy, either.

     So I guess the point is, it's too early to tell exactly what the impact will be.  There will be an impact, but we knew there would be, regardless of the outcome of the race.  And there certainly were some priorities where Secretary Clinton didn't agree with President Obama, and in a different scenario, she would be -- you'd be asking me the same question about some of those policy priorities, too.

And what's true is that the President-elect has some difficult questions to answer and some big challenges to tackle. And it's why it's so important for there to be a smooth and effective, efficient transition from President Obama's presidency to the Trump presidency, because as Americans, we're rooting for the success of our President in leading and uniting the country.

     Q    Are there any more details that you can share about the phone call between the President and President-elect?  Can you say how long they spoke?  Did they get into any issues of any substance, or was it purely just, congratulations on your victory?

     MR. EARNEST:  My understanding is it was not a lengthy call. It did take place very, very late last night.  And based on the fact that there was a discussion about meeting in person on Thursday, the specifics of any sort of policy discussions will be left until then.

     Q    Was not lengthy -- less than a minute?  A couple minutes?

     MR. EARNEST:  I don't know with a lot of precision exactly what the timing was.  If there are more details about that that we can provide, we'll do so.

     Jeff.

     Q    Josh, on the policy differences, is there anything that the White House or your administration will do in closing months to shore up priorities on policy areas like the Affordable Care Act, climate change, the Iran deal -- all of which now-President-elect Trump called into question during his campaign?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me start by saying that President Obama will remain in office and will be the President of the United States until January 20th.  And we will pursue policies accordingly, including the kinds of priorities that you have just enumerated.

What’s also true is that the President-elect, in the context of a smooth and effective transition, will have an opportunity to get briefed by members of President Obama’s team and actually have a conversation with President Obama himself about some of these priorities.  And I’m not going to speak for him or predict exactly what sort of policy decisions he’s going to make -- and he was pretty explicit on the campaign trail -- but part of a smooth transition is ensuring that they have the latest available information about the status of these policies.  And that’s something that our administration is committed to providing.

Q    Aside from providing that information, is there anything that your administration will do to sort of put up a firewall to maintain some of these programs in place against what will probably be efforts to repeal, in Obamacare’s case, or to slow-walk on climate change, or to rip up the Iran deal?

MR. EARNEST:  Jeff, our position on all those issues is well known and something that we’ve reviewed in here at some length.  I’ll spare you most of that.  But I think the way that I’d respond to that is there’s no specific thing that I have in mind that we’re going to do differently now.  Our plan all along was to ensure the successful implementation of those and other priorities, and we’re going to be committed to doing everything we can to ensure the success of those policies between now and January 20th.

So the easiest example is the Affordable Care Act.  This administration is going to continue to make a strong case that people should go to HealthCare.gov, consider the options that are available to them, and sign up for health care, and the vast majority of people who do will be able to purchase health insurance for $75 a month or less.  That is a policy priority that benefits the American people enormously.  Since the Affordable Care Act went into effect, 20 million Americans got access to health care.  And we want to make sure that as many Americans as possible understand the opportunity that’s available to them.

The President-elect, when he enters office, will have his own opportunity to set the course of health care policy in this country in a way that he sees fit.  It’s going to require some cooperation with Congress, and that won’t be easy.  But there’s a lot at stake, and Republicans in the Congress have voted 50 times to repeal the Affordable Care Act, and each time they did that, they were voting to take health care away from 22 million Americans.  They were voting to strip critically important consumer protections from people that prevent them from being discriminated against because they have a preexisting condition, or paying more for their health insurance just because they’re a woman.

Those are the kinds of protections that don’t just benefit the 20 million Americans who got health care since the Affordable Care Act went into effect, but the 100 million or 150 million Americans that get access to health care through their employer.

So these are the kinds of decisions that the incoming administration and the incoming Congress will be challenged to make.

     Q    How do you reassure foreign allies, particularly on issues like the climate change deal, the Paris agreement, or the Iran deal, that these things will continue when the person who is succeeding President Obama said they wouldn't?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jeff, there are a couple things.  The first is, obviously, this administration will be committed to implementing those policies through January 20th and we will live up to the commitments that we have made in each of those areas as we do so.  Second, there is a tradition, particularly with regard to executive agreements, of successive Presidents preserving some element of continuity.

I don't know whether or not that will fly in this case.  But as a part of this effective, smooth transition, President Obama will have an opportunity to talk to President-elect Trump about some of these policies and about some of the benefits of some of these policies.  The President-elect's team will have an opportunity to get briefed by the national security experts here in the Obama administration that have been working on implementing these policies.  But, ultimately, the President-elect will be the person that is responsible for setting the path of foreign policy for the United States for the next four years.

And presumably, some of that strategy that he will pursue will involve reassuring the allies that enhance the national security of the United States.  That certainly was part of President Obama's -- the foreign policy path that President Obama charted, and previous Presidents have as well.  But obviously President-elect Trump will have to make that decision for himself once he enters the Oval Office on the afternoon of January 20th.

     April.

     Q    Josh, I want to go back to the firewall and ACA, and his conversation tomorrow.  Is this a tomorrow conversation?  Is this a conversation that's going to continue when it comes to ACA, a legacy piece for this President?  And what would that conversation look like that the President would offer to Donald Trump about ACA and its viability -- tweaking but not getting rid of it?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, April, the thing I can for sure tell you is the President's top priority is not his legacy but the 20 million Americans who have health insurance -- or who got their health insurance since the Affordable Care Act went into effect. He is quite concerned about stripping protections from the more than 100 million Americans who benefit from protections that prevent insurance companies from discriminating against them because of a preexisting condition, or imposing lifetime caps that certainly put young people with an illness at pretty great risk.  Those are the kinds of consumer protections that are part and parcel of the Affordable Care Act, and tearing them away would negatively affect a lot of people.  And that's something that Republicans will have to consider moving forward.

     In terms of these kinds of conversations, the way that the transition is structured is that there are transition teams that have been designated across the agencies at the federal government.  And the President-elect's transition team has designated teams to work with those individual agency teams to ensure a smooth transition.  So there will be a venue for staff-level conversations to take place -- high-level, staff-level conversations.  But I wouldn't predict at this point whether or not this will come up in the conversation between President Obama and President-elect Trump, but if this is something that President-elect Trump is interested in talking about, I'm confident that President Obama won't hesitate to spend some time doing so.

     Q    And last question.  On the issue of unifying the nation after what this White House calls a hard-fought election cycle, many are looking at -- many people, be it Democrat or Republican, black or white -- they're looking at what's going to come in the next four years.  A Supreme Court that's going to lean to the right.  The House and Senate majority Republican and the White House a Republican President.  I talked to someone this morning  -- a black Republican, Christopher Darden, a former O.J. Simpson prosecutor -- who said this is going to create a new type of activism in this nation.  How do you marry the thought of this new activism and the unification that the President has talked about at the same time?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the President in some ways addressed this in his remarks in the Rose Garden about encouraging young people who were engaged in the political process in this election for the very first time.  And the President made an effort to encourage young people who got engaged in the process not to be discouraged by the outcome.  Everybody is discouraged when the candidate they're supporting loses an election.  But the genius and brilliance of our democracy is that when the election is over, we recognize that we're Americans and patriots before we're Democrats and Republicans.

     And that is certainly a principle that President Obama and Secretary Clinton have forcefully advocated in the last 90 minutes or so.  And I think that's part of the reason that so many people are proud of the campaign that Secretary Clinton ran, proud of the progress that has been made in this country under President Obama's leadership.  And, frankly, it's why so many young people were and have been inspired over the course of President Obama's career in public life, but also in the context of Secretary Clinton's campaign for the presidency.

So if the outcome of this election encourages more people to be engaged in the important but difficult work of governing this country, that would be a really good thing.  And I say that regardless of whether or not that young person who is mobilized to act is a Democrat or Republican.  The President believes that our democracy benefits from more people being engaged and more people being involved in the debate, regardless of which candidate they support.  Our democracy is strengthened when more voices and more perspectives and more views are incorporated into the process of governing this country.  And the risk, really, --and this is what the President was sort of warning against -- is people being so discouraged that they choose to withdraw from that debate.  The President is surely hopeful that that won't happen.

     Q    And one last piece.  The President was at the microphone in the Rose Garden, he seemed hopeful, optimistic.  But really, behind the scenes, what is his mood today?

     MR. EARNEST:  I've had an opportunity to spend a little time with him this morning, and the mood that was on display in the Rose Garden is the mood that he was showing in private as well.

     Look, I'm not trying to convince you that he's not disappointed by the outcome.  Everybody around here is disappointed by the outcome, but just as determined to continue their service to the American people.  And that service demands that they focus on their institutional responsibility to ensure a smooth transition to the next President.

     The President doesn’t get to choose his successor; the American people do.  And his responsibility to the American people and his responsibility to this democracy supersedes his own personal views, even on really important issues.  And that's why the President has given clear direction to his team -- and these are directions that he actually gave at the beginning of this year -- to ensure that regardless of the outcome, that his team, that this White House was prepared to give the next President a running start.

And President Obama is rooting for President-elect Trump's success in uniting and leading the country.  It doesn’t mean that he agrees with everything that President-elect Trump has promised to pursue.  In fact, as he noted in the Rose Garden, and rather colorfully across the country at campaign events over the last few weeks, he's deeply concerned about some of the priorities that Mr. Trump laid out in the context of the campaign.  But the demands of our democracy apply to everybody, including the President of the United States.  And our democracy's success depends on a smooth transition of power, and that's a responsibility that President Obama and everybody here at the White House takes quite seriously.

     Isaac.

     Q    The President, campaigning against Donald Trump, spoke often about the existential threat that he thought that a Trump presidency would pose.  Is he concerned for the future of the country and the future of the world, given that Donald Trump has been elected President?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, Isaac, the President had used forceful language in helping people understand exactly why he was so passionate in his support for Secretary Clinton.  And those are authentic views that haven’t changed.  That's not just rhetoric. Those aren’t just slogans.  Those represent the President's actual views and preferences about the direction that he'd like to see the country go.  But that's not what the American people voted for.

     Q    Does he believe that nuclear war is more of a possibility now?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I'm not going to speculate on what sort of actions President-elect Trump may choose to prioritize or pursue.  Obviously, he and his team are going to spend the next 73 days or so preparing themselves to lead the greatest country in the world.  And part of what makes this country so extraordinary and so exceptional is that the United States has the greatest fighting force that the world has ever known.  And that's not just a testament to our technological superiority; it's a testament to the brave and selfless Americans who are prepared to put their lives on the line to fight for this country.  That's what makes our military so great.

     We've also got a federal workforce, people who dedicate their lives to serving the public, that ensure that our air and water is clean, that ensure that even the youngest Americans can get access to a quality education, that are working hard to make sure that the American people who don’t have access to health care can purchase it.  These are talented, committed Americans who, after working to ensure the success of President Obama, will be just as passionate about ensuring the success of President Trump.  They don’t do that because either President necessarily reflects their personal political views; they pursue that work because they care deeply about serving this country, and they care deeply about the success of this country.

And, in some ways, I think that's something that most people -- that's difficult to appreciate until you've had the opportunity to spend some time working in the federal government, and you see the people around you who don’t get a lot of public glory, they don’t get particularly large paychecks, but they feel a calling to serve.

     And President Obama often describes the U.S. government as the largest and most impactful organization in the world.  And that is the organization that President-elect Trump will lead for the next four years.

     Q    Josh, not 48 hours ago, the President, in Philadelphia, warned of giving Donald Trump the nuclear codes.  Is he concerned that Donald Trump now, as President-elect, will be getting the nuclear codes?

     MR. EARNEST:  Isaac, what I can tell you is that the election is over and it's been decided.  The American people have decided.  President Obama doesn’t get to choose his successor; the American people do that.  And they’ve chosen somebody that President Obama disagrees with on a wide range of issues, and those disagreements in most cases aren't just minor disagreements, but rather profound disagreements.  But that does not in any way detract from the President’s determination to execute a smooth and effective transition of power.

     That's what or democracy demands.  The success of our democracy depends on it.  And the President is certainly determined to live up to the very high standard that was set by President Bush eight years ago.

     Q    One last one.  Is the President still doing the foreign trip that was scheduled?

     MR. EARNEST:  Yes.  I do not anticipate any changes to the President’s foreign travel next week.

     Jordan.

     Q    Thanks, Josh.  Donald Trump, during the campaign, pledged to jail Hillary Clinton, if she was elected, over the federal investigations that were underway.  Some legal experts have said that President Obama could close off that opportunity if he pardons Hillary Clinton.  Is that something that the President is considering doing?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jordan, as you know, the President has offered clemency to a substantial number of Americans who were previously serving time in federal prisons, and we didn’t talk in advance about the President’s plans to offer clemency to any of those individuals.  And it's because we don't talk about the President’s thinking, particularly with respect to any specific cases that may apply to pardons or commutations.

     What I would direct your attention to, though, is the President’s observation that he made in the Rose Garden about the tone that President-elect Trump displayed in his remarks last night.  And that tone is consistent with the longstanding traditions of our democracy.  And the President expressed hope that that kind of tone would continue.  That's relevant because we've got a long tradition in this country of not -- of people in power not using the criminal justice system to exact political revenge.  In fact, we go to great lengths to insulate our criminal justice system from partisan politics.  And that commitment has served our country very well for more than two centuries, and the President is hopeful that it will continue.

     Q    Is he confident that it will continue, or just hopeful? Did he have a chance to talk about those issues with President-elect Trump?

     MR. EARNEST:  I'm not going to speculate about any -- about steps that President-elect Trump may choose to take.  But the President expressed some optimism about the tone that President-elect Trump used when the eyes of the world were on him, when he spoke last night as the President-elect for the very first time. That was a momentous occasion, and his tone was notable.  And hopefully it will continue in a way that is consistent with the kind of longstanding traditions and laws that have served a variety of Presidents in both parties very well for 240 years.

     Chris.

     Q    Thanks, Josh.  So, understanding that the President would not look kindly on any kind of pursuit of prosecution against Hillary Clinton, would you expect or is it possible that he would ask for assurances from Donald Trump that that was not going to happen?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don't have anything to preview in terms of their conversation.  We'll try and get you a readout after that conversation occurs tomorrow, but I don't have any preview to offer at this point.

     Q    Other than sort of the nuts and bolts of a transition, can you give us any insights into what the President’s priorities are tomorrow?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the President’s priorities tomorrow are to sit down with the President-elect and make clear that this administration’s top priority for the next 73 days will be ensuring that the next President can get off to a running start.

Look, this is not new.  This is actually the third time in a row that a two-term President will be succeeded by a President for the other party who ran vowing to roll back key aspects of the incumbent President’s agenda.  So in 2000, you had then-Governor George W. Bush vowing to roll back the agenda of incumbent President Clinton.  Fast-forward eight years, you had then-Senator Barack Obama running for President, successfully, vowing to roll back aspects of then-President Bush’s agenda.

And here we are, eight years later, facing a situation where the American people have elected a Republican -- President-elect Trump -- who ran on a platform of vowing to roll back key aspects of President Obama’s agenda.  But in each case, despite those vigorous disagreements, there was a commitment to the peaceful transfer of power that served the American people and our democracy very well.  And President Obama continues to be committed to that principle.



     Q    There does seem to be a commitment, though, both on Donald Trump and many of his Republican supporters’ side to get rid of the immigration reform that the President has put in the place, to get rid of the ACA, to go after the climate change agreement.  So I know you said that you're going to pursue those policies accordingly, but was anything done in advance with the possibility, knowing that Donald Trump could be elected President -- were people looking at what could be done at all to, from your perspective, safeguard these things, move forward on these things, try to prevent, for example, the ACA from being repealed?

     MR. EARNEST:  At each stage, since each of these policies was pursued, this administration has worked diligently to implement them as effectively and successfully as possible with an eye toward the long term.  None of these policies that we've been pursuing were considered a stop-gap measure or somehow temporary in nature.  The President pursued these policies because of the long-term benefits they have for the American people.  And consistent with that view, we have worked very hard to implement them so that they'll be durable.

     And look, when it comes to the ACA, the ACA has withstood some significant challenges from Republicans in the past.  We've had two Supreme Court cases.  We've had 50 repeal votes.  And in the face of all of that, the Affordable Care Act is still limiting the growth on health care costs, expanding access to health care coverage, providing consumer protections that guarantee some peace of mind for millions of Americans.

Is it at risk again because the President-elect is vowing to repeal it?  Yeah, it is again.  But we've withstood some difficult challenges.  That law has withstood some difficult challenges.  And we'll see what the future holds.  A lot of that will be up to the President-elect, but I think what we have found is that much of that will also require some kind of cooperation from Congress.  And Republicans did hold onto majorities in both the House and the Senate, but they don’t have 60 votes in the Senate, so it's going to require some bipartisanship in the Senate to advance some of this legislation.

     And the House of Representatives over the last couple of years has not exactly been the model of organization.  That's an unruly place.  And even people -- even members on the Republican side of the aisle have some deeply held and divergent views about the kinds of policies they should be pursuing.

     So this is not going to be easy.  But the bottom line is, everybody here at the White House is rooting for the success of President-elect Trump in his effort to unite and lead the country.

     Q    And if I could just ask you finally on that point, that obviously there's a lot of emotion involved here.  There's a lot of people who worked on Hillary Clinton's campaign who are very well-known, and worked side-by-side here in the White House with the folks here. I think they believed, as the President does, that his legacy was at stake here.  Can you give us a little insight into who the President spoke to this morning?  Did he talk to the staff in general?  Did he talk to small groups of people?  And what was his overall message besides what we heard in the Rose Garden today?

     MR. EARNEST:  The President has on a number of occasions now had an opportunity to address small groups of the staff.  And the message that he's delivered to them in private is entirely consistent with the message that he delivered in the Rose Garden, with some special emphasis on the need for young people to remain engaged.

Christi, you spent enough time around this White House now to know that a lot of the people who have spent the last two or three years here working at this White House are pretty young, and they’ve got -- if they choose to pursue it -- a bright future in politics.  And President Obama wanted to deliver to them a very personal message that they should not be discouraged, that it's easy to sit back and by cynical, but, as you heard him say so many times on the campaign trail, he's going to choose hope, and he's hoping they'll choose hope, as well, even in the aftermath of a disappointing outcome.

     Even as I've been talking to my staff today, the other observation that I have made is that I've heard people often say that adversity builds character.  I'm not sure that's true.  I think adversity reveals character.  And I think we've seen the kind of character that Secretary Clinton and Senator Kaine and President Obama are made of.  And their example serves as an inspiration to me about the kind of character that I hope, even in this difficult time, that I can show.  And I know I'm not the only staffer here at the White House who feels that way.

     Kevin.

     Q    Can I ask you about Merrick Garland?  Now that there won't be sort of the lame duck that I think many people predicted, what happens to his potential nomination?  Has the President reached out to him at all?

     MR. EARNEST:  I don’t know that President Obama has had an opportunity to speak with Chief Judge Garland today.  The truth is our view of this situation has not changed.  It's deeply discouraging how unfairly he has been treated by Republicans in the United States Senate who abdicated their basic responsibility to give him a hearing and a timely vote.

So we'll have to see what happens moving forward.  But I can tell you that the intensity of the case that we will make in support of a candidate that has more experience on the federal bench than any other Supreme Court nominee in history, in support of a candidate that even Republicans acknowledge is somebody with a brilliant legal mind and somebody who represents the kind of consensus nominee that Republicans claimed they were hoping that President Obama would appoint.

     So the outcome of this election certainly doesn’t change the case that we will make about the necessity of the Congress considering his nomination, even though he's been waiting more than 200 days now.

     Q    Let me ask you, though, about the outcome of the election.  I know it's been less than 24 hours, but as a guy who lived in Missouri, went to school in Texas, worked in Florida, you've been around parts of the country -- that obviously the Trump message resonated with the majority of the voters.  What happened last night as best can you tell?  And did you have to practice saying "President-elect Trump" -- President-elect Trump?  Did you practice that?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, you may be able to tell it doesn’t come naturally.

     Q    No, it does not.  (Laughter.)

     MR. EARNEST:  But it's what the job requires, it's what our democracy requires, and it's what the American people expect.  So I undertook the necessary preparation to try to deliver it as smoothly as I possibly could and with as much respect as I possibly could.  Look, in terms of the results across the country, it's really hard to say.

     Q    But you've been in those places.

     MR. EARNEST:  Yes.

     Q    You kind of have a -- you understand what the Missouri voter is like.  You know what the Texas voter is like.  You know what the Floridian is really like.  And I'm just trying to figure out -- and again, granted, brevity of time won’t give us sort of a full picture -- but can you understand why that message seemed to resonate with them at all?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, look, let me give you one example of a race that I followed closely in Missouri, in my home state of Missouri -- a fellow Kansas Citian by the name of Jason Kander ran for the United States Senate.  He was a Democratic candidate. He had already won statewide in the state of Missouri previously when he served as Secretary of State, and he was widely praised for running a smart, tough campaign.  And he was dogged, tireless in going door-to-door and making a case to people that, frankly, he anticipated and a lot of people anticipated would get the support of a lot of Missouri voters who weren’t traditionally Democratic voters.

     And the thing that's hard to square about this election is  -- I think the easy thing to say would be that Donald Trump performed so well in Missouri because voters in Missouri were pretty unhappy with what's going on in Washington, D.C.  They're dissatisfied with the dysfunction.  They're not seeing the kind of results from their elected representatives in Washington, D.C. that they would like to see, and they're sending a message by choosing somebody like President Trump to enter the White House and shake things up and make some changes.

     But at the same time, a majority of Missouri voters also support Senator Blunt, who is somebody who is the -- spent a lot of time in Washington and spent time representing the people of Missouri in the United States House of Representatives, and has done the same thing in the United States Senate.  So that would be -- it would appear that there's a bit of a mixed message there.  And I think part of the optimism around Mr. Kander's campaign was around the idea that he could benefit from the same kind of anti-incumbent energy that was obviously propelling Mr. Trump's campaign.  But that's not the way it turned out.  It turned out that people apparently -- I haven’t looked carefully at the results, but it certainly looks like you had a situation where people were motivated by their party identification and the party identification of the candidates more so than they were this sort of outsider, anti-establishment energy.

     So I think in some ways that is a pretty good illustration of the complexity of discerning the motivation of voters across the country.  But, listen, voters sent an important message, and it's important for people who are going to serve in the next administration and people who are going to serve in the next Congress, both in the House and the Senate, to spend some time thinking about what that message was, because it was a forceful one.  And the American people are going to be expecting results, and what those results are is something that representatives in both parties are going to have to spend some time thinking about.

     Margaret.

     Q    Josh, the President campaigned so vigorously for Hillary Clinton on the trail, working this so hard.  I know you can't read sentiment this early on, truly, and discern what the message was, but can you at least say why you think the White House's own internal predictions and readings were so wrong?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, it's not just our read of this that was wrong.  Just about every public poll that we saw was wrong.  You guys will check me on this because you guys follow this a little bit more closely than I did -- I'm not aware that any candidate campaigned in Wisconsin.  And I think that's a clear indication that everybody, including both candidates, expected Secretary Clinton to win Wisconsin.  And she didn’t.  And it's not close enough that anybody is calling for a recount.

So it is clear that nobody got the outcome that they expected last night.  Now, does that mean that the polling industry has now been officially disrupted, or that political consultants are going to have to change the way they do business? Maybe.  And that would be something interesting for them to consider over the next couple of years.

     But I think it's just hard to tell exactly what the message was -- what the message from voters is.  As I mentioned earlier, there are a substantial number of voters that voted for Barack Obama twice and then voted for Donald Trump yesterday.  And given the vigorous opposition that President-elect Trump professed to have for the Obama agenda, it raises a lot of questions about why those voters supported him.  And the answer to that is not obvious to me.  Maybe it is to somebody else.  And I suspect that political analysts and academics and political professionals are going to spend days and weeks and months and maybe even years digging into these results and trying to get greater clarity to explain the outcome.

     Q    Did this in some way -- I mean, the President -- you talked about some of the issues, but he used very stark terms, saying the very future of the Republic in a way is hinged on this election, that it's a defense of American values, really laying the stakes in very stark terms.  So does he still believe that today, that the viability of the America he believes this country is, is at stake?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, as I mentioned earlier, the argument that the President was making on the campaign trail was an authentic one.  It reflected his views.  It wasn’t just a slogan; it wasn’t just a bumper sticker.  He was making an argument that he deeply believes about the direction that he’d like to see the country go.

     Q    But he doesn’t believe democracy is at risk?  I mean, the future of the Republic -- he said that repeatedly in North Carolina and elsewhere.

     MR. EARNEST:  The President made a forceful argument and he stands by that argument.  But the time for making that argument is past.  The American people rendered their judgment.  And President Obama doesn’t get to choose his successor; the American people do.  And they did.  And they didn’t choose the person that President Obama supported.  And so now the responsibility that President Obama has is to turn his attention to prioritizing a smooth transition of his successor and ensuring a peaceful transition of power.

     But, frankly, the President’s aspirations are higher than just a peaceful transition of power.  He wants to make sure that we've got an effective transition that gives the next President the opportunity to get a running start.  Because now that the election is over, it's a good time to remember that we're Americans first and all of us are rooting for the success of President Trump as he assumes the awesome responsibility of trying to unite and lead this country.

     Q    Can you tell us any color around how this happened last night?  Who informed the President, how he spent his evening?

     MR. EARNEST:  The President was monitoring returns from the Residence last night.  I don't have a lot of details to share from there.  Obviously he relied on staff to help coordinate the calls that he placed last night to Secretary Clinton and to President-elect Trump respectively.  And he stayed up late in order to do that.  He wasn’t able to reach President-elect Trump until after President-elect Trump had delivered his remarks last night.  So it was rather late.  But obviously he had to work through staff in order to make that happen.

     Q    If the President goes on this trip, as you said -- or you said that schedule is not changing -- how is he going to explain to his allies what happened?  I mean, the President, on mostly all of his recent foreign trips, has basically said he’s confident that Hillary Clinton is going to win, none of what just transpired was going to happen.  What is his message going to be? And it would seem to be redirecting what was going to be a farewell visit.

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, the President spent a lot of time on his foreign travels over the last 12 to 18 months offering reassurance to our partners and allies around the world about the state of the political debate in this country and the likely outcome of the election.  And now that we have an outcome of the election, I think the President will continue to offer reassurance to our closest allies and partners about the steadfast commitment of the United States to the kinds of alliances and partnerships that advance our interests and keep our country safe.

     Many of our strongest alliances are alliances that have been fortified by Democratic and Republican Presidents.  And President Obama obviously invested a lot of his own time and attention to prioritizing investments in many of those alliances, particularly in the Asia Pacific.  And President-elect Trump will chart a foreign policy path that he believes is in America’s best interest.  He will do so after getting the benefit of briefings from President Obama and from the national security experts in the Obama administration that have been implementing that policy and implementing that strategy.

     But I think the reassurance that President Obama can offer to a lot of our allies is that, traditionally, and for generations, in some cases, our alliances have transcended individual Presidents and individual political parties in part because some of our alliances are rooted in the deep cultural ties between our two countries.  But ultimately, it's going to be up to the President-elect to decide.

     Carol.

     Q    I want to go back to the President’s rhetoric during the campaign.  So you're saying that his comments about Donald Trump being unfit to be President of the United States and shouldn’t have the nuclear codes, he’s a genuine national security threat to the United States if he was elected -- you're basically saying the President still agrees with all of that, but the voters have spoken, so the sun came up and everybody should move on?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, look, I think what the President said in the Rose Garden is that our democracy demands -- the success of our democracy demands that the President put aside his own personal political views and his own preferences as he transitions out of office.  The President doesn’t choose his successor; the American people do.  They have spoken.

     Q    A lot of people took what he said very seriously and therefore voted for Hillary Clinton based on some of these things that he said.  And they’re nervous, anxious.  So what does he say to them?

     MR. EARNEST:  He says to them that our -- the institutions of our democracy have been in place for 240 years, and our democracy has been buffeted by great challenge, some of which originated inside the United States, some of those challenges originated overseas.  But by relying on our institutions and democratic traditions, demonstrating a faithful commitment to the will of the American people, our democracy hasn’t just survived, it's thrived.

     And the President places great faith in the American people and in our longstanding democratic traditions and institutions.  He places great faith in the people who make up those institutions -- whether that's the United States military, our men and women in law enforcement, the millions of American patriots that are civil servants that serve in our federal government.  He also places great confidence in those Americans who don't work in government but are committed to moving this country forward.

And that was the reference that he made in the Rose Garden to teachers that are responsible for educating the next generation of Americans.  They don't get a lot of glory, they don't get big paychecks, but they are critical to the success of our country and our country’s future strength.  The same would apply to nurses all across the country.  They don't get the glory, but they are doing the quiet work of striving to perfect our union.

Q    At tomorrow’s meeting, do you know, is Melania Trump also coming to meet with the First Lady, as is tradition?  And any sense of what time this meeting will happen?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I'm not aware of Mrs. Trump’s travel plans.  You’ll have to check with her team.

Q    Any sense of time?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't have a sense of time yet, but we'll try and pin that down before the end of the day today so you guys can plan your day tomorrow.

Mark.

Q    Josh, if the President puts aside the harsh criticism that he leveled against Trump during the campaign and welcomes him tomorrow, doesn’t that put the meeting under an air of insincerity, bearing in mind what was said about him -- what Carol mentioned, the unfit and unqualified to be President and Commander-in-Chief?



MR. EARNEST:  No -- to be blunt.  The President is quite sincere about fulfilling the basic responsibility that he has to the American people and our democracy to ensure a smooth transition to the next presidency.  At the same time, Mark, the President has no desire or inclination to paper over the deep differences that the two of them have.  The President acknowledged them in his remarks in the Rose Garden.  And his expectation is that President-elect Trump is going to make the decisions that are consistent with his own policy views when he becomes President of the United States.

And there’s a strong chance that President Obama is going to disagree with at least some of those decisions, but the success of our democracy depends on everybody -- every single citizen -- including the President of the United States, setting aside their partisan affiliation, setting aside their political preferences, and rooting for the success of the American President as that person seeks to unite the country and move us forward.

     So I'm not saying it's going to be an easy meeting, but the President is deeply sincere about fulfilling this responsibility. And look, I think it was also evident from hearing the President talk about this that President Obama entered office at a tumultuous time in our nation's history.  We were in the depths of the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression.  And his ability to mobilize an effective response that has spawned a historically strong recovery depended on him getting a running start.  And that running start was only possible because of the commitment of President Bush and his team to this same principle of a smooth and effective transition.

     So President Obama has experienced firsthand how a President benefits from the incumbent President devoting the time and energy that's necessary to help the incoming President get off to a running start.  And President Obama is genuinely rooting for President-elect Trump to succeed in uniting the country and helping this country make additional progress.  And that's a sincerely held view.

     Q    And despite what you said at the start, might you want to respond or comment on what Speaker Ryan said -- that the election was a repudiation of the liberal and progressive policies of this President?

     MR. EARNEST:  I think there will be plenty of time for me to respond to statements like that in the days ahead.  But in the spirit of today, we'll set that aside.  But we can talk tomorrow. I've got some thoughts.

     Michelle.

     Q    What can you say about how much of the returns the President watched?  How late was he up?  Was he up all night?  Who was he watching with?  Was he with his family and staff?  And what can you say about his reaction?  I mean, during the campaign, you said that there was no comparison between these candidates, that there really wasn't a choice.  But this is the choice that was made.  I mean, surely he must have been stunned at some point.

     MR. EARNEST:  President Obama did stay up late.  It was not until after Mr. Trump -- President-elect Trump completed his remarks last night that President Obama was able to reach him on the telephone.  So I know it was at least 3:30 a.m. or 4:00 a.m. before President Obama was able to turn in.  I suspect the same is true of all of you.  So he's not looking for any sympathy.

     Q    Was he with staff and family?

     MR. EARNEST:  The President was in the residence.  I don't know that there was any staff that was with him in person.  He obviously was in communication with a number of staff members last night.  And I don't know whether or not members of his family joined him as he was watching the results.

     Q    Okay, and his reaction to things going the way they did?

     MR. EARNEST:  Listen, I think you got a good sense of the President's reaction in the Rose Garden, which is the candidate that he was supporting didn't win and that's disappointing -- to him and to the 52 million other people who voted for Secretary Clinton.

     Q    So you're saying that at no point in the night was he surprised or had any other reaction other than an upbeat, let's move forward?

     MR. EARNEST:  No, I don't think anybody -- and when I say I mean everybody got an outcome that we weren't expecting, that applies to the President, too.

     Q    Can you describe anything of his reaction along those lines, though?  Because I think --

     MR. EARNEST:  Look, it wasn't a positive surprise in his mind.  He obviously was forcefully weighing in, in support of Secretary Clinton.  And he felt strongly about this race.  He made clear that there was a clear choice.  But the President knew going into last night that once people started casting ballots on Election Day, his responsibility shifted from advocating for his preferred successor to planning for a smooth transition with whomever won the election.

     So he was mindful from the beginning of his responsibilities to the country and to our democracy, in part because of his own personal experience of benefitting from that kind of planning that President Obama -- that President Bush initiated in 2008.

     Q    Do you know at what point he started to think, this is really going in the opposite direction than expected?

     MR. EARNEST:  I don't know at which point he reached that conclusion.  I think that eventuality sort of dawned on everybody at some point probably relatively late in the evening last night.

     Q    Okay.  And these comments have been brought up a couple of times now, but for both the President and other members of the administration to say during this campaign that the things that Donald Trump was saying were danger -- were actually dangerous to national security, and you said just today that there are real concerns -- so what are at the top of the President's concerns right now?  For somebody to transition to someone that he actually called unfit and dangerous for national security?

     MR. EARNEST:  Michelle, that is the rhetoric that you heard from the President on the campaign trail.  That rhetoric reflects the President's views.  It certainly reflects his own experience of having served in this job.  And it reflects his own unique perspective on who is best qualified to succeed him.  But the election is over.  The election has been decided.  And we live in a democracy.  And that democracy means that the President doesn't choose his successor -- the American people do.  And they did.  And the President's responsibility as the outgoing President is to ensure a smooth and effective transition with the President-elect.  And that is now the President's top priority.  And that's one that previous Presidents have demonstrated.  It's served our country and our citizens very well.  And the President's expectation is that a commitment to those principles and a commitment to an effective transition will serve the country well this time, too.

     Q    That's exactly my question, though.  I mean, you said that the time for argument is over.  Well, that's right.  This is now real.  So if we are to believe, as you said we should, the President's concerns that this was a dangerous situation, surely the President must have some real concerns right now.  And can you describe maybe the parameters of those concerns?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I want to be real clear about this.  The election is over.  There are going to continue to be debates in this country about the future of our country.  There are going to be tough debates in Congress about the future of our country.  There are going to be tough debates inside the Republican Party about the future of our country.  There are going to be some tough debates inside the Democratic Party about the future of our country.

     So the election is over.  And you've seen Secretary Clinton and Senator Kaine offer up their gracious concession.  And you heard President Obama graciously commit to a smooth transition, even with a candidate that he did not support -- in fact, one that he vehemently opposed.  But that's what our democracy demands, and that is evidence of the durability and strength of our democracy.  And it will serve the incoming President well.  It will serve the incoming Congress well.  It will serve our allies and partners around the world well.  It will serve our economy well.  And that's why the President has made this such a priority.

     Q    And our democracy also demands that, at some rare times, although most recently in 2000, the winner of the popular vote is not always the President.  Does that make this more painful for the administration?

     MR. EARNEST:  Look, I can't speak for everybody, but it doesn't to me.  Everybody knows the rules -- everybody knew what the rules were.  And I think the outcome of the popular vote is an indication that Secretary Clinton's historic campaign succeeded in mobilizing tens of millions of Americans behind her vision and her candidacy.  That is a credit to her.

     President Obama I think deserves a little credit for that too, given how aggressively he campaigned for her and given the kind of agenda that he also laid out.  But no, everybody was aware of the fact that the next President is determined based on a count in the Electoral College, not a count of the popular vote.

     Q    Okay.  And quickly, also during the campaign, he said many statements to the effect of this is not who America is; this is not what we stand for; I believe in the judgment and values of the American people that they will choose the candidate I support; and that America is not as divided as people say.  Does he still believe those things that he said then?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what is true is that the President had an opportunity to convey his very well-known views about the two candidates on the campaign trail many, many times over the last several weeks.  But he knew all along that what he was doing is advocating to the American people, trying to convince them to support his preferred candidate.  And some 52 million of them did.  But not enough to win the electoral vote, and that is our system of democracy.  And it's not perfect, but it's a system that has served us very well.

     Q    But what I'm saying is, has this changed the President's view of who we are and what America is?  If that's kind of the tone that he was taking.

     MR. EARNEST:  No, I don't want to leave you with that impression.  Obviously, the President disagrees with the outcome, and his preferred candidate didn't win.  But, look, what it says about the voters and their motivation and their priorities -- again, I think people are going to spend weeks, months, if not years, trying to discern what this all means.  But at the most basic level, what it means is that it means Donald Trump is the President-elect of the United States, and the responsibility of the sitting President is to make sure that President-elect Trump can hit the ground running when he enters the Oval Office.

     Q    At one point he told I think it was a group of black lawmakers that he would take it as a personal insult if Hillary Clinton was not elected and if great numbers didn't turn out.  So does he take this as a personal insult?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, the feelings that the President was conveying in that speech to the CBC were authentic and they reflect his views.  But the election is over, and the time for advocating for a specific candidate has come to an end.  And the time for planning for a smooth, effective transition for the President-elect is now well underway.  And that's a process that President Obama is deeply committed to.

     Gardiner.

     Q    Josh, you've emphasized the smooth transition being important and you keep pointing back to the transition that happened between George W. Bush and Mr. Obama.  But as far as I know, Mr. Bush never tried to lobby President Obama directly to maintain some of his policies.  But you just told us that the President will have the opportunity to talk to the President-elect Trump about some of these policies.  Are you suggesting that Mr. Obama is going to lobby Mr. Trump directly to maintain some of these policies that Mr. Trump has repeatedly excoriated on the campaign trail?  And if that's not going to happen, doesn't that mean that the Iran deal, emission limits, immigration edicts, transgender bathrooms -- all those things are sort of gone on January 21st?

     MR. EARNEST:  There’s a lot there -- that's good.

     Q    Sorry.

     MR. EARNEST:  That's okay.  These are important questions.  I think the first thing is, I can't speak to the nature of the conversations between President Bush and then President-elect Obama.  I don't know if President Bush lobbied President Obama on any issues or not.

     I think what I would say in terms of trying to help you get a sense of the kinds of conversations I'm trying to describe, I wouldn't use the word "lobby."  I think what I would do is I would basically say the intent of President Obama and his team is to brief President-elect Trump and his team on these policies.

     Q    (Inaudible.)

     MR. EARNEST:  Again, the point that I'm trying to make is this, is that -- and President Obama has acknowledged this -- that the view of certain policies once you're inside government gives you a new appreciation for the benefits of those policies. Am I suggesting that President Trump is going to reverse himself on a whole range of things that he's been campaigning on for more than a year and a half?  No.  I'm not trying to make that case, because I don't think that's true.

     But what President Obama is hopeful of is -- well, what President Obama is committed to is an effective transition that helps bring President-elect Trump and his team up to speed on the current status of U.S. policy, including foreign policy.  And there is a long tradition of Presidents, even Presidents in different parties, seeking to preserve some measure of continuity, particularly where those interests align.

     I wouldn't predict at this point how all that shakes out.  The one thing that I would point out is that there are certain situations where the downside of unilaterally withdrawing from some of these international agreements is significant.  So the consequences, for example, with the Iran deal, of pulling out, you do risk the Iranians trying to break out.  At the same time, there's also a U.N. Security Council resolution that applies to this agreement -- that means that this agreement is something that's supported by our allies, but also by Russia.  That, I think, could be a pretty good indication of how united the international community is behind this agreement.  And President-elect Trump will have to decide what impact a sort of  unilateral withdrawal would have on our relationship with countries around the world.

     But, again, the American people have trusted him with the presidency.  He will determine the course of our foreign policy and our national security, and he'll have to evaluate all of those things.  My point is, is based on the existence of that U.N. Security Council resolution, based on the potential consequences of unilaterally withdrawing from that agreement, it's much more complicated than saying you're just going to tear the agreement up.  It doesn't mean he won't do it.  It just means that when briefed on all of these consequences, he'll have to take a close look at what policy he chooses to pursue.

     Q    But that assumes an optimism that your briefing can actually change his mind.  And this is a man, Mr. Trump, whom the President has described for months as someone who is deliberately ignorant about much of what goes on in the federal government and doesn’t seem interested, actually, in losing his ignorance about many of these issues.  So you're suggesting a process here of the President educating the President-elect in a way that will get him to change his mind, but that defied the description that the President himself has given of Mr. Trump as someone who's willing to take counsel and change his mind.

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, look, the President acknowledged in the Rose Garden that the tone that President-elect Trump displayed last night, at a moment when the world was watching, was markedly different than the tone that he typically adopted on the campaign trail.  That's one small example.  Does that apply to his policy positions?  Who knows?  But in the context of ensuring an effective transition, this administration is going to convey as much information as possible about U.S. policy and the benefits of that policy, and the consequences, positive and negative, for our pursuit of that policy.

And ultimately it will be up to President-elect Trump to weigh all that information.  Presumably, he'll rely on the advice of experts and advisors who have been supportive of his campaign, and maybe even some who haven’t been, to ultimately make some of these decisions.  But your example of the Iran deal is a good one, because there are significant and wide-ranging consequences that make it clear that it's not just as simple as some of the campaign rhetoric might make it seem.  Does that change his decision?  I have no idea.  And if he does, I guess I'll be reading about it in the newspaper.

     Christi.

     Q    So, then, earlier when you said to Chris that this is not going to be easy, you weren’t just talking about dismantling the Affordable Care Act, you were talking about the Obama legacy?

     MR. EARNEST:  I think when I said -- at one point earlier, I did say it won't be easy, and I think I was referring to the meeting itself.

     Q    You were talking about trying to repeal Obamacare is not just as easy as decree --

     MR. EARNEST:  I see.  So that's a different example.  Obviously, there's a role for Congress to weigh in on all of this.  There's still a Republican majority in both the House and the Senate, which presumably would make that a little bit easier. But there are filibuster rules in the Senate that I know that Leader McConnell has previously expressed some significant passion for protecting.  We'll see if he retains that passion moving forward.  But that certainly would require some bipartisan cooperation.

     The same is true -- well, there's a different situation in the House, which is that you all have well chronicled the deep divisions within the Republican Party in the House that make for a rather unruly majority.  And it means that Speaker Ryan I think, in some cases, is going to have to look for some Democratic cooperation at least.

     And again, when you're on the campaign trail you say, well, this is a law I oppose, and I'm going to tear it up when I get in.  But then you get into office and you realize, well, I'm going to need Congress's cooperation, and it turns out that we probably have to work in bipartisan fashion to get anything done in the Senate.  Trying to organize the Republican conference in the House of Representatives is kind of a mess.  All of a sudden it gets a lot harder.  Does that change the outcome?  I don’t know.  We'll have to see.

     My point is, is that these are the kinds of the difficult questions that President-elect Trump will inherit, particularly when you consider the consequences of that decision, which include stripping health care from 20 or 22 million Americans, significantly increasing the deficit, significantly increasing health care costs, including for small businesses.  So there are real-world consequence to deal with that often, in the context of campaign rhetoric, aren’t accounted for.

     Q    So what I'm getting at is if people are tempted now to say the Obama legacy is toast, you would contend with that -- based on your analysis of the Obamacare repeal and what you just said to Gardiner about the Iran deal?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think it is far too early to tell exactly what kind of decisions President-elect Trump will make and what impact they will have on the priorities that President Obama has so proudly achieved.  It certainly is not as positive a picture that I'd be painting if Secretary Clinton had emerged victorious.  I'd feel a lot more confident because of the rhetoric that she used on the campaign trail about her commitment to pursuing many of the priorities that President Obama has been focused on.

     Mr. Trump ran on a different platform.  And what President Trump chooses to do with regard to those policies as he makes decisions is something that you can't fully analyze in the abstract.  We'll have to -- as his presidency moves forward, you all will have an opportunity to evaluate what impact his decisions have had on the accomplishments that President Obama and his team are quite proud of.

     Q    So it's not as positive as if Hillary Clinton had been elected, but not as bleak as the President portrayed it last week?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think -- the President stands by the rhetoric that he used on the campaign trail, but the President has also, himself, in describing his own campaigning and his own governing, has noted that there's a significant difference between the two things.  It doesn’t mean that you fold on your principles.  It doesn’t mean that you're necessarily over-promising.  It just means that they are two different things.  And it's why there are all these open questions that only President-elect Trump can answer.  And I don’t know how many of them he'll try to answer on the first day, but you guys will just have to let me know.

     Q    Let me ask you this.  You also said to Margaret that when the President is overseas he'll be trying to reassure allies and partners of the steadfast commitment.  I mean, that's in question now, right?  How can he do that, exactly?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, he can do that based on the longstanding tradition in our democracy of Democratic and Republican Presidents reinforcing our relationships around the world that advance our national interest.  There's a Democratic and Republican tradition to strengthening our alliance with South Korea, for example.  And what we have found is that our alliance with South Korea supersedes any individual presidency, it supersedes any individual political party, because we've seen multiple Presidents in both parties seek to strengthen that alliance.



     So that would be, if you're looking for a reason to be hopeful about the future of the U.S.-South Korea alliance, that's what you would draw from, is the long history in this country of Presidents in both parties seeking to reinforce that alliance.  Is that something that President-elect Trump will do?  I don’t know.  We'll all find out.

     Q    So the President will be saying "I hope," not "I assure"?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the President will say that there is a long tradition -- there is reason to be optimistic because we've seen Presidents in both parties pursue a strong alliance with South Korea.  That's just the first example that popped into my head.  I'm not singling them out for a specific reason.  Are some of those leaders likely to say, well, Mr. Trump appears to be different than recent Republican Presidents?  They wouldn’t be wrong about that.  So the President can offer some measure of reassurance, but ultimately the American people have chosen to give President-elect Trump the responsibility for figuring that out.

     Q    And just one quick logistical thing.  Do you expect a news conference tomorrow?

     MR. EARNEST:  Unclear at this point whether or not President Obama will take questions, but we'll keep you posted.  At a minimum, you can certainly expect that the President will spend some time taking questions from all of you over the course his trip overseas next week.

     Q    And maybe tomorrow?

     MR. EARNEST:  Maybe tomorrow.  But we'll try and get you some clarity about that before the end of the day.

     Q    Any expectation that President-elect Trump would take questions?

     MR. EARNEST:  You'd have to check with his team on that.

     Toluse.

     Q    On the topic of reassuring world leaders, has the President actually reached out to any world leaders?  Have any reached out to him since this result has been known?  Since the President said earlier this year that different world leaders are rattled by Donald Trump's candidacy.

     MR. EARNEST:  When I walked out here, which was some time ago now, I was not aware of any conversations that President Obama had had with foreign leaders at this point.  But if there are calls like that that we can read out, we'll let you know.  I can't speak to who has reached out to the White House or to the U.S. government since last night.  I'll let those individual governments speak for themselves.

     As Christi alluded to, on the course of President Obama's travels next week, he will have an opportunity to see the leaders of many of the countries with whom the United States has an important relationship.  And we'll have more details about that trip in the next couple of days.

     Q    One of the countries that the President will be visiting is Peru.  I wanted to ask about TPP.  I think there was I guess an idea that the lame duck period would be focused on the President stumping for and campaigning for TPP both publicly and I guess with Congress.  Given the fact that this election has repudiated the idea of trade with many nations, with Donald Trump's victory, has that changed?  Is the President still going to stump for TPP the same way?

     MR. EARNEST:  I guess, Toluse, the first observation I would have is that this is a question you'd be asking me regardless of the outcome of the election last night, because obviously Secretary Clinton's stated opposition to this has been well covered, as well.

     I think what I can say, in general -- well, the first thing I can tell you is that President Obama did have an opportunity earlier today to speak to Leader McConnell on the phone.  The President is hopeful that he'll be able to connect with Speaker Ryan at some point relatively soon, and we'll let you know when that's occurred.  And they did have a conversation about the outcome of the election, and President Obama did congratulate Leader McConnell on his success in retaining the title of Majority Leader in the United States Senate, and they had an opportunity to discuss some of the priorities for the lame duck session.

I don’t have a detailed readout to share, but President Obama does continue to believe that this is the best opportunity that the Congress has to take advantage of the benefits of a Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement that cuts taxes -- 18,000 taxes that other countries impose on American products.  We've got a strong case to make with regard to the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and we're going to encourage Republican leaders to take it up and pass it because of the enormous benefits that would accrue to American workers, American businesses, and the broader U.S. economy.

Gregory.

Q    Has the President ordered that President Trump now receive the same full President's Daily Briefing that he himself receives every day?

MR. EARNEST:  Gregory, I can tell you that the Presidential Daily Briefing and other intelligence materials has been made available to President Trump -- President-elect Trump, Vice President-elect Pence, and a couple of designated members of his team.  This is a courtesy that President Bush extended to President-elect Obama, Vice President-elect Biden, and a couple of designated members of their team.  This is an important part of ensuring the kind of smooth transition that President Obama has prioritized.

Q    And it's the same briefing that he himself receives?

MR. EARNEST:  I can't speak to the nature of the information that is presented, so I'd check with the DNI.  But the idea here is that the President-elect and the Vice President-elect and some of their key national security advisors -- just a couple of designated officials -- can begin to get access to the kind of material that they will need to make important foreign policy decisions once President Trump takes office.

Q    Following up on Jordan's question about pardons for Secretary Clinton, specifically, but also generally, the President was asked about this in August, about last-minute pardons, and he said that any last-minute pardons would have to go through the Office of Pardon Attorney, through the White House Counsel, through the regular process, and that all pardons would be based on merit and not political considerations.  Does that guidance still stand?  And wouldn’t that preclude the President from giving a last-minute pardon to Secretary Clinton?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I remember when you had an opportunity to ask President Obama about this at the Pentagon earlier this summer.  And the answer that President Obama gave you in that news conference still applies.  I wouldn’t speculate at this point about what impact that may have on hypothetical pardon requests that he receives.  I'll just say that the guidance that President Obama shared with you is still operative.

Q    And is the Cleveland Cavaliers event still on for tomorrow?

MR. EARNEST:  Absolutely.

Andrew.

Q    The President said he was encouraged by some of the things that he's heard from Donald Trump over the last couple of about 24 hours.  Does the President have confidence that Donald Trump will respect the rule of law?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Andrew, I think at this point what President Obama is responding to is the tone that President-elect Trump displayed at his event last night.  And the significance of that is that Mr. Trump had to make a conscious decision -- President-elect Trump had to make a conscious decision about the tone that he was going to use in speaking to not just to supporters in the ballroom, but also the millions of Americans watching on TV and the tens of millions of people watching around the world.  It's a high-stakes moment.  It was an opportunity for President-elect Trump to make an impression.  And I'm confident that he was aware of that.

And at that moment, he chose to adopt a tone that seems generally familiar to people who have been watching Presidents-elect at Election Night events.  That would seem to suggest that certain basic principles of our democracy are likely to be upheld.  Certainly one of those principles is ensuring that criminal investigations and our criminal justice system is not infected with partisan politics.

     The question is, really, whether or not that tone will persist.  And I'm sure that President Obama won't be the only one watching.

     Q    Do the results of the election alter the President's post-presidency plans?  I mean, is he likely to remain more in the public eye after this than he would have otherwise done had Hillary Clinton won?

     MR. EARNEST:  Look, again, the election results are barely 12 hours old.  But in those 12 hours, I'm not aware of any change or reconsideration that the President has made about his post-presidency plans other than the likelihood that he probably is looking forward to his post-presidential vacation now more than ever.

     Yes, ma'am.

     Q    Thank you.  I'm correspondent from Afghanistan.

     MR. EARNEST:  Nice to see you.

     Q    Thank you.  I would like to ask you, how does the White House transfer the Afghanistan policy to the next President?  Do you think that Afghanistan people or Afghan people should have a high expectation from the new President?  Do you think that any change on the policy towards Afghanistan?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I will confess that I don't recall having heard President-elect Trump speak extensively about his view of U.S. policy toward Afghanistan.  Some of your colleagues in the press corps here may have covered the debates or other events with Mr. Trump more closely and they can fill you in on that.  But it's not clear to me exactly what sort of preferences or views he has articulated with regard to our policy toward Afghanistan.

     I would put this in the category of other important foreign policy decisions that the next President will have to make.  And to ensure that he is effectively positioned to make a good, smart decision that's consistent with our national interest, President Obama and his national security team will ensure that President-elect Trump and his team have access to all of the information that's necessary to make future decisions about U.S. policy in that region of the world.

This is obviously the kind of decisions that the next President will make that will have a significant impact on our foreign policy and will have a significant impact on the thousands of U.S. servicemembers that are currently serving in Afghanistan and countering the threats that emanate from Afghanistan.  So the stakes of that decision are high.  The kind of decisions that have to be made in that environment are not obvious.  But the next President will certainly benefit from the kind of informed, carefully considered advice from leaders in our military, leaders in our diplomatic corps, leaders in our intelligence community that have been very focused on U.S. policy in Afghanistan.

     John Decker.

     Q    Thanks a lot, Josh.  The President today in the Rose Garden praised the transition model that was put forward by former President George W. Bush, said that's the transition model that he'd like to follow.  As it relates to not only President George W. Bush's post-presidency model, but also Bill Clinton's post-presidency model, George H.W. Bush's post-presidency model, they've refrained from criticizing their successors.  Would President Obama also follow that same model -- refrain from criticizing President Trump and his policies once President Obama is a former President?

     MR. EARNEST:  Listen, I don't think I can say anything declarative about that question.  Presumably that's something that between now and January 20th you or one of your colleagues could ask him.  I think what I can tell you is that I've heard him say -- and I believe he said this in public -- he has appreciated how, particularly early in his presidency, former President George W. Bush was not a regular, active, public presence, offering his critique of the new President.

     And President Obama believes that that was not just beneficial to his ability to run the country and make difficult decisions; I think it also reveals the character of our 43rd President.  Surely, I'm confident in saying that President George W. Bush did not agree with every decision that President Obama made in his first year or two in office.  But he kept his disagreements to himself.  And I know that President Obama has appreciated President Bush taking that step to give the incoming President the running room necessary to make decisions, to advocate them for them publicly in a way that would have been much more difficult if the recently departed President was critiquing his every move.

     Q    I wanted to ask about the relationship -- it's an unusual relationship, in a way, that President Obama has had with the President-elect.  I say that because early on in the President's tenure as President, as you may recall, the President-elect questioned the citizenship of President Obama.

     MR. EARNEST:  I do recall that.

     Q    And then a short time after that, the President famously went after, you could say, the President-elect at a Correspondents' Dinner, brought a lot of laughter.  I realize that --

     MR. EARNEST:  From almost everybody in the room.  (Laughter.)

     Q    -- I realize that the election is so fresh, but has the President had time to be introspective in the sense that the person that he's had this unusual type of relationship -- from afar, essentially -- is now succeeding him as President?



     MR. EARNEST:  Well, it’s not news to observe that President-elect Trump and President Obama have deep, longstanding, and public disagreements on a wide range of issues, including with regard to some of the tactics and rhetoric that the President-elect used on the campaign trail.  The President was quite outspoken about that in the context of this election.

     But the election is over.  The American people made a decision.  President Obama didn’t get to choose his successor; the American people did.  And President Obama’s responsibility now is to ensure that the incoming President, no matter how significant their disagreements, can get off to a running start. And President Obama, including in his capacity as a former President, will genuinely be rooting for President Trump’s success in uniting and leading this country.

     Q    Have President Obama and President-elect Donald Trump actually met fact-to-face before, or will this be their very first meeting?

          MR. EARNEST:  I believe that they had one other opportunity where they were at a public event together.  Off the top of my head, I don’t remember where that was, but I feel like they may have had one.  But I guess what I would say is this: They do not have an extensive personal relationship.  (Laughter.) This is not a situation where they’ve had many conversations or played golf together or any of that business.  So I guess that will be among the many, many, many reasons that tomorrow’s meeting will be rather interesting.  Okay?

     Chris, I’ll give you the last one.

     Q    Thanks, Josh.  I think there’s a lot of fear among LGBT people and others who’ve seen progress under the Obama administration, like Muslims and immigrants, that they’ll face persecution under President Trump.  What is President Obama’s message to them?

     MR. EARNEST:  President Obama’s message to them is that our country has benefited from a steadfast commitment to a set of democratic institutions, and these institutions have been durable even through a civil war, through a couple of world wars, through financial calamities.  And the President has enormous confidence and faith in those institutions, in part because those institutions are made up of patriotic Americans.  That’s true whether we’re talking about public servants who are employees of the federal government or the brave men and women of our armed forces.  Those institutions serve the American people well, and it’s important for our leaders to demonstrate faith in them and to rely on them.  That faith in those institutions has served very well some of our country’s greatest Presidents.

     The other observation that President Obama would make -- and he did so in the Rose Garden -- is that progress in our country hasn’t moved along a straight line, and progress that we make in some of these areas is characterized by two steps forward and one step back.  Sometimes it’s characterized by delayed progress.  The observation that President Obama would make is that the best response to that is not to lose hope or to be cynical or to withdraw from the public discourse.  It actually calls for greater engagement.  It calls for more people who passionately and strongly about these issues to stand up for what they believe in.

Secretary Clinton, I think, put it best:  It’s worth fighting for what’s right.  She’s certainly done that throughout her three-decade career in public life.  And it’s something that President Obama has certainly done not just while he’s held elective office but even before he entered elective office and that’s a -- I think it should be -- well, let me say it this way: I think Secretary Clinton intended that as very good advice for people who may be feeling discouraged today.

And it’s understandable that people are feeling discouraged because it’s natural that you’re going to be disappointed when the candidate that you supported in the election doesn’t win.  But even the losing candidate in this case does not think that that should be used as an excuse to withdraw from the public debate and public discourse.  If anything, it should serve as a motivation to become even more deeply engaged and more deeply involved, and not just in a presidential election.

Q    And I have a variation on the firewall question.  Many of these advancements for LGBT people and others are the result of executive action undertaken by the President.  Is there anything the White House can do to protect them in the next administration?

     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I won’t speculate at this point about what President-elect Trump may or may not do.  Every time the President has initiated a decision or made a policy decision or taken an executive action, he’s done so with a long-term perspective.  His approach to policy-making has been to be cognizant of the long-term implications of the decisions that he’s making, and it means that he is making these decisions with the assumption that the decisions will be durable, that they’ll be in place for some time, and that benefits that the American people will enjoy as a result of those decisions will be present for a long time.

So that’s been approach since his first day in office.  But ultimately the approach that President-elect Trump takes is one that he alone will determine.

     Thanks, everybody.  We’ll see you tomorrow.

                        END                  3:00 P.M EDT
12:28 P.M. EST

 MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Happy Monday.  I hope you all enjoyed your weekends.  I do not have any announcements at the top, so we can go straight to your questions.

Kevin, would you like to begin?

Q    Sure.  Thank you, Josh.  Has the President talked to anyone affiliated with President-elect Trump’s transition team or to President Xi about the President-elect’s call with the leader in Taiwan?  Have any concerns been expressed with foreign leaders at all about this call?  Or is this simply President-elect Trump’s to own and for the current administration to distance itself from?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, I don't have any presidential conversations to tell you about.  I can confirm that U.S. officials, including senior officials at the National Security Council, have been in touch with their Chinese counterparts to reiterate our country’s continued commitment to a one-China policy.

This is a policy that is based on three joint U.S.-China communiques that were negotiated by different U.S. Presidents in different parties and, of course, by the Taiwan Relations Act.  This is a policy that has been in place for nearly 40 years, and it has been focused on promoting and preserving peace and stability in the strait.  The adherence to and commitment to this policy has advanced the ability of the United States to make progress in our relationship with China and, of course, has benefitted the people of Taiwan.  Taiwan, after all, is the ninth-largest trading partner of the United States, and they certainly benefit from peace and stability in the strait.  And pursuit of and commitment to that peace and stability advances U.S. interests.

If the President-elect’s team has a different aim, I'll leave it to them to describe.

Q    Have you had conversations with the President-elect’s team, and did you get the sense that this call is designed to forge closer relations with Taiwan?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think it's hard to determine exactly what the aim was of the President-elect.  I know both the Vice President-elect and his campaign manager were -- when asked about this over the weekend, indicated that these were courtesy calls -- or that this was a courtesy call and the President-elect was merely returning that call.  The Washington Post today tells a different story, with some Trump aides indicating that this was a long-planned call and that this is part of a broader strategic effort.

It's unclear exactly what the strategic effort is, what the aim of the strategic effort is, and it's unclear exactly what potential benefit could be experienced by the United States, China or Taiwan.  But I'll leave that to them to explain.

Q    Keeping on foreign affairs, what is the President’s reaction to the election results in Italy?  And he put some political capital into this, bringing Prime Minister Renzi in for the final official visit.  Is he disappointed in the results?  And is he concerned that this is kind of the beginning of the unraveling of the European Union?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, obviously both the President and the President-elect had quite a bit to say about this when Prime Minister Renzi was here at the White House back in October.  And the President, at that point, indicated his hope that the Italian people would be supportive of the referendum and the reforms that Prime Minister Renzi put forward.  Didn’t turn out that way.

I would warn against painting with an overly broad brush about the potential consequences of this outcome.  There certainly is a not entirely unreasonable tendency to want to loop together the outcome in the UK and even the outcome of the U.S. presidential election with this outcome.  But each of these is different.  We're talking about different constituencies.  In one case, we're talking about a presidential election; in two other cases we're talking about a referendum, only one of which actually had a direct impact on Brexit.

So there are some broader trends that are worthy of analysis, but I think there’s a risk in oversimplifying that analysis based on the outcome of yesterday’s referendum in Italy.

Q    Thank you.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.  Roberta.

Q    Since Friday, what contact has the administration had with other allies in Asia who may have been concerned about the call?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't have any other diplomatic conversations to tell you about.  Obviously the United States, through the State Department and other agencies, including occasionally from the National Security Council, is in touch with our allies not just in Asia but around the world.  I think that there were a couple of conversations over the weekend between senior U.S. officials at the National Security Council and Chinese officials to reiterate and clarify the continued commitment of the United States the our longstanding one-China policy.  But beyond that, I don't have diplomatic conversations to read you out.

Q    You can't say one way or the other whether there were other conversations with other allies?

MR. EARNEST:  I can't say one way or the other.

Q    And I guess I'm wondering, with the rebels in Aleppo being almost completely overwhelmed, how concerned is the White House that Al-Nusra or other groups like that are going to step in and sort of gain strength because of what’s happening?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think our concern with the situation in Aleppo right now, Roberta, is focused on the plight of thousands of civilians, including children, who are caught in harm’s way.  And the reports continue to trickle out of Aleppo are increasingly dire and the situation there continues to worsen.  And it's clear that while far too many innocent lives have already been lost, there are many more innocent lives that are at risk, including women and children.

And it is a reflection of the depravity of the Assad regime. It is a reflection of the willingness of the Russian government and the Iranians to risk deepening involvement in a quagmire to accomplish a goal of trying to shore up their influence in the region.  And it raises profound moral concerns.  It also serves to isolate Syria, Russia and Iran from basically the rest of the world, who’s deeply concerned with the violence that they see continuing to be perpetuated in that war-torn country.

Q    So it raises profound moral concerns.  Are any adjustments being made to U.S. policy in Syria because of what's happening now?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the U.S. efforts underway right now are diplomatic in nature.  And we have said from the beginning of this conflict that a military solution is not available.  The only available solution is a diplomatic one.  And for a time, the United States, through the historic and tenacious efforts of Secretary of State Kerry, were focused on trying to reach a bilateral negotiated agreement with the Russians.  But again, despite his tenacious efforts, that kind of solution was not to be found.  But Secretary of State Kerry has remained undeterred and has continued to pursue a multilateral negotiated agreement to try to bring the violence to an end, or at least reduce the violence and not allow so many innocent Syrians to be in harm's way of a bloody bombing campaign.

But I'd refer you to the State Department of an update on those efforts, but obviously that's something that he continues to work on very diligently because of our nation's profound concern for the plight of those innocent Syrian men, women and children.

Michelle.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Among the criticism that's been out there of Donald Trump's foreign policy or his contact with foreign leaders are that he's winging it, and also we've heard from one who is a congressman, that that's how wars start.  How seriously does the administration take some of these contacts?  I mean, do you think that this borders on dangerous?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, whenever you are talking about the President-elect of the United States interacting with foreign leaders, it's incredibly important.  It has profound consequences for our country and for our national interests around the world. In talking about this situation -- well, let me be more specific.

Last week, we had some conversations about a conversation that the President-elect had with the Prime Minister of Pakistan. And I noted in answering questions about that telephone call that President Obama, over the course of his eight years in the White House, has benefitted significantly from the expertise, advice, and experience of career diplomats at the State Department.  And that expertise and advice is available to the President-elect.  That advice will continue to be available to him when he enters the Oval Office.  President Obama benefitted from it, and President-elect would, as well.

Q    Do you think that his contact with Taiwan and his tweeting about China, is that dangerous?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what is true is that there has been a longstanding policy in place that's been governed by our one-China policy, undergirded by three different joint communiqués negotiated between U.S. Presidents and their Chinese counterparts.  My understanding is that these -- or the facts are that these communiqués were negotiated, one in 1972 by President Nixon, one in 1979 by President Carter, and one in 1982 by President Reagan, and those joint communiqués have guided our approach to this region of the world.  And the Chinese government in Beijing places an enormous priority on this situation and it's a sensitive matter.  And some of the progress that we have made in our relationship with China could be undermined by this issue flaring up.  It’s also unclear how the people who live in Taiwan benefit from this issue flaring up.

The response from the Chinese government in the aftermath of this call has primarily been to ratchet up the rhetoric against Taiwan.  And it’s unclear to me how that kind of consequence benefits the people of Taiwan or benefits the ninth-largest trading partner of the United States.  So these are significant issues and worthy of careful consideration.

Q    And we know the Chinese officials reached out to the current administration after this phone call with Taiwan.  So what does this administration say to the Chinese in this instance?  I mean, what really can you say?

MR. EARNEST:  What we have made clear in a couple of different phone conversations is that the administration is committed to our nation’s pursuit of a one-China policy rooted in three communiques and the Taiwan Relations Act.  This is a policy that’s been in place for 40 years -- or almost 40 years, and it’s a policy that has been aimed at promoting peace and stability in the Strait.  And this has been a policy that has advanced the interests of the United States both in terms of advancing our relationship with China, but also in terms of the interests of the people of Taiwan, who happen to be the ninth-largest trading partner of the United States.  So there are significant economic consequences here as well.

Q    So, in saying that, are you expressing confidence to them that that policy will continue?  Or do you really have no way of knowing?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it’s the President-elect and his team who can speak to what sort of policy they intend to pursue after January 20th.  I can’t speak to that.

Q    But you say that there have been a number of phone conversations with the Chinese government.

MR. EARNEST:  I’m aware of two different phone conversations with officials at the National Security Council with their Chinese counterparts.

Q    Okay, great.  Thanks, Josh.

MR. EARNEST:  Justin.

Q    I wanted to return to Italy first.  I was wondering if you could talk a bit about what you anticipate it meaning for European refugee policy, and also if the administration -- if anybody in the Treasury Department or here at the White House has been in touch with sort of financial markets out of this concern that this could either impact the Euro, or kind of spark fears of a recession or a run on the banks -- all these different possible economic consequences.

MR. EARNEST:  There are obviously a range of potential contingencies any time there is a significant national election like this.  It’s no secret that the Treasury Department has been closely monitoring the financial system in Italy for some time now.  There have been increased signs of volatility there.  I’m certainly no expert on those issues so I’d refer you to my colleagues at the Treasury Department for an analysis.

I know that a number of analysts have suggested that the market reaction is indicative of this being the anticipated outcome, but I’ll let those analysts speak to that assessment.  Obviously, the United States and Italy have an important economic relationship, and the United States benefits from Italy and the EU more generally making smart financial and economic decisions.
With regard to the potential consequences for the unity of the European Union, I think that remains to be seen.  Obviously, this is not a -- the referendum was not on -- was not a question about Italy’s relationship with the EU, but there are a range of broader potential consequences that I can’t speak to.  But obviously, there are some important political decisions for Italy in the near term in terms of Prime Minister Renzi submitting his resignation and the need to form a new government -- whether that’s a caretaker government or another government is something that ultimately the Italian President will have some say on.

But, look, the United States and Italy have an extraordinarily important relationship.  And that relationship was on display when Prime Minister Renzi was here at the White House just six weeks or so ago.  And obviously, there’s a deep cultural relationship between our two countries.  There are many people who live in this country who proudly identify themselves as Italian-American.  The security relationship between the United States and Italy is critical.  Italy is a NATO member and has made important contributions to our counter-ISIL campaign, to the NATO effort in Afghanistan.  And we obviously work closely and consult closely with Italy as we resolve some of the security concerns with regard to ISIL’s presence in Libya.

So this is an extraordinarily important relationship to the United States and to our national security and to our economy.  And that will continue to remain the case even as they work through some of the political challenges that they’re currently facing.

Q    I want to ask about the decision by the Army Corps to delay the Dakota access pipeline for an environmental review.  I’m interested both in your general reaction, but also if the White House was in any way sort of in contact with the Army Corps or dictating this decision to sort of further --

MR. EARNEST:  Justin, I’ve indicated before that the White House was being regularly updated on the talks between concerned local residents and federal agencies, including the U.S. Army with regard to the construction of this infrastructure project.  The White House did not and has not been dictating the outcome, but rather has been updated by the Army Corps on the negotiations.

The President, a couple of weeks ago, welcomed the indication from the United States Army and other government agencies to redouble their consultation with those communities that are most directly affected by the construction of this project.

This is typically the kind of principle that you would hear from conservative politicians -- that whenever the federal government is undertaking a project that has a direct impact on a local community or a local American citizen, that the rights to that person and that community should be very carefully considered.

There has been some criticism from self-described conservative politicians.  Why they have reached a different conclusion in this case is something you'd have to ask them.  It's curious to me.  But I think more generally, the President believes that this kind of consultation between federal agencies and local communities is important, particularly when a local community has such a significant stake in the outcome or is so significantly affected by a project like this moving forward.  And that was the case in this situation.  And the result has been for this federal agency to determine that more study is required. But ultimately that was a decision that was arrived at by the agency -- in this case, the United States Army.

Q    Protestors there obviously are happy with the delay, but there's been complaints throughout the last few weeks about some of the tactics that have been used by local law enforcement, whether it be using water cannons on freezing nights, or rubber bullets.  I'm wondering what the White House's perception of the way local law enforcement has treated these protests is, and if there's been any consideration of sort of a federal intervention into the interaction between protestors and law enforcement.

MR. EARNEST:  I'm not aware of any contemplated federal *interaction [intervention] at this point.  What I am aware of is the very first thing that the President said publically about this matter earlier this fall.  And the very first thing that he said was he encouraged protestors to abide by the responsibility that they have to exercise their constitutional rights to protest peacefully.  They have that responsibility.  The President also made clear that law enforcement officials who have a responsibility to keep that peace have a responsibility to handle themselves in a manner that would promote peace in watching over these protests.  So that's important.  And that's the responsibility that people on both sides of this issue have, and the President's expectation is that those are responsibilities that they should uphold.

Q    One last one.  President Rouhani said over the weekend that if President Obama did not block the Iran Sanctions Act there would be a "firm response" from Iran.  I'm wondering what your reaction to that is, and especially your level of concern, considering that the Ayatollah and others in Iran have said continuing this legislation, even though it doesn't directly impose sanctions itself, would be a violation of the Iran nuclear deal.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, we've made clear since Congress was considering the passage of this legislation that this legislation was not inconsistent with the agreement that was reached in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action -- this was ultimately the international agreement to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon.  We've been clear about that from the beginning, and that's clear today.  And in fact, we made clear that if Congress did pass legislation that undermined the deal that was inconsistent with the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action that the President would veto it.

And given the support in the Congress for the deal, there was sufficient political support to ensure that the President could back up that promise.  In this case, because the legislation doesn't undermine the deal and is not inconsistent with the agreement, the President does intend to sign it into law.

Olivier.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  I've got two for you.  The first one -- I'm trying to understand this outreach -- this conversation between the U.S. and China in the aftermath of the President-elect's phone call.  They know that he doesn't speak for you guys and that you guys don't speak for him, so I'm trying to understand how your message of continuity of policy can get across to them.  They've got to know, as you acknowledge, that in January, everything could change.  So are you promising them that he's going to see the light somehow, or what’s the message there?

MR. EARNEST:  No, there’s no attempt and no effort and, frankly, no desire to make promises on behalf of the President-elect.  When the President-elect assumes office, when he assumes the awesome responsibility of governing the greatest country in the world, that’s something that he’ll do on his own.

The assurances that we could offer the Chinese government were the ongoing commitment of the U.S. government to the pursuit of a one-China policy that we believe has benefitted the United States, China and Taiwan.  But the Chinese government and senior officials in the Chinese government are sophisticated enough to understand the complexities of the U.S. political system and they understand that President Obama’s ability to set our policy towards this region of the world expires on January 20th, and someone else will take over.  Our message -- the message that was conveyed by senior National Security Council officials was intended to make clear that the policy position of the Obama administration had not changed.

Q    And then could you give us a flavor -- we got a flavor of the speech tomorrow from Eric last week.  Could you flesh it out a little bit more?  What is the President’s purpose in giving this speech tomorrow?  Is this a legacy-minded assessment of his eight years in office on the foreign policy front?  Is it about unfinished business?  And to the degree that it is about unfinished business, is he planning on suggesting to the incoming administration that they finish that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t have a whole lot more to say about the speech for tomorrow.  We’ll try and get you some more information before the end of the day today, just as you prepare to write about the President’s speech.

I think, in general, what I can tell you is that the speech is focused on underscoring how important some of the reforms are that President Obama has put in place with regard to greater accountability and transparency in our national security programs.  These reforms were necessary in part because, when President Obama took office our country was benefitting from new technology, including the use of unmanned aerial vehicles, to apply pressure to terrorist organizations and terrorist leaders in remote locations.  And President Obama believed it was important and worth a lot of time and effort to impose some constraints on how that program was used and to make it more transparent.

And the President’s view is that by putting in place that legal architecture, it would make the program more durable.  It would also inspire greater confidence around the globe in our ability to conduct these programs consistent with our values.  And so much of the authority and influence the United States wields around the world is derived from our adherence to these universal values.

So I think the goal tomorrow is to help the American people understand why these reforms were so important, and understand why they’re so valuable to our national security moving forward. There will be an acknowledgement that there is additional work in this area that needs to be done and will require thoughtful consideration by national security professionals in the next administration.  But the President is quite proud of all of the progress that we have made, both in terms of keeping the country safe, but also in making sure that our country lives up to the values that are central to our greatness.

Jordan.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  I want to know if the White House has any reaction to the arrest that was made yesterday at Comet Pizza up in Northwest.  I’m asking because the President has spoken out a number of times on the corrosive effect that fake news has had on the political discourse, and I know that a lot of the rumors surrounding that establishment was spread by fake news online.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me start by complimenting and crediting local law enforcement here in the Washington area who responded with a lot of professionalism to that situation in preventing any bloodshed.  So this is just another example of how our men and women in blue never take a day off from keeping us safe.  We owe them a debt of gratitude, and that certainly applies to the brave men and women who serve in the Metropolitan Police Department here in Washington, D.C.

The second thing I can tell you is that those law enforcement officials are continuing to investigate this situation.  I know there have been some interviews that have been conducted with the subject and I think there’s some interest in trying to learn more about what exactly his motives were.

I think more generally it’s -- even without knowing precisely what those motives were, I think there’s no denying the corrosive effect that some of these false reports have had on our political debate.  And that’s concerning in a political context. It’s deeply troubling that some of those false reports could lead to violence.

So, again, it’s unclear if that’s exactly what happened in this situation.  I’ll let local officials speak to that.  But this is something that I think everybody is going to spend some time thinking about, particularly people in this room and the people who represent news organizations in this room.  How people understand what’s happening in the world is important to the functioning of our democracy.  And this is something that I assume the next administration is going to have to spend some time thinking about and working on as well.

Q    Do you think the President-elect or his top advisors need to speak out about this problem, too?  We’ve seen the son of Michael Flynn, the incoming national security advisor, spread some of the rumors about this pizza shop on his Twitter account. So given that, do you think that senior members of the Trump team need to respond?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not here to issue any specific challenges to the incoming administration on any topic.  I think we all hold a responsibility, regardless of whether or not we are planning to serve in a government position or if one of our family members is planning to serve in a government position, that we shouldn’t be propagating false things that could inspire violence.  I think that’s a -- there’s probably some overlap of the Golden Rule there I think somewhere that may be worth considering.

Q    Just lastly, there was a group of 22 Republican senators who sent a letter to President Obama today asking him to stop issuing any non-emergency rules and regulations in the final weeks of the administration.  Just wondering if the White House has received that letter and if you have any response to it.

MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t seen the letter, but it’s not the first time we’ve been asked about a letter that purports to carry the same kind of message.  And I think I’ll just reiterate something that I think President Obama has said, which is simply that the rulemaking process in the Obama administration continues.  And our goal is not to generate a bunch of new rules in response to the surprising election outcome, but rather to ensure that the rulemaking process that has long been underway is completed effectively and in a timely fashion before President Obama leaves office.  And that’s what we’re focused on doing.

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Any update on the situation in Oakland, California -- devastating fire there?  Is there any federal response to what has happened there?

MR. EARNEST:  Obviously, Kevin, what happened in Oakland is a heartbreaking situation.  Dozens of people who thought they were showing up to a party didn’t go home.  And it raises lots of questions that are still being carefully considered by investigators about building codes and what sort of precautions were put in place to ensure the safety of partygoers.  And obviously, those precautions were woefully insufficient, and it’s a tragedy.

I can tell you that White House officials have been in touch with the mayor’s office to offer our condolences and offer our support to local officials that are bearing a heavy burden.  And this is another situation where you’ve got first responders who put themselves in harm’s way to try to protect the public -- in this case, firefighters and EMTs that used their skill to save lives.  And we’re certainly grateful for that.  But this is a community that’s mourning and it’s obviously a very sad turn of events.

Q    Let me ask you about Gitmo.  I understand there was indeed a transfer.  Can you give us more details about that, and do you expect others this week?

MR. EARNEST:  I'd refer to my colleagues at the Department of Defense for the details.  But there was one Guantanamo Bay detainee that was transferred to Cape Verde.  This is an individual who will be subject to some security requirements that were negotiated in advance by the United States with the local government there to ensure that this individual does not pose an undue threat to our national security.

The population at Gitmo is now down to 59.  And there are still at least a couple dozen of those individuals who are eligible for transfer, and we're continuing to do the diplomatic work of finding an arrangement for those individuals to be safely transferred to another country.

Q    So it's still the President’s intention to continue with the transfers but not necessarily close down the facility -- is that sort of a fait accompli at this point?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, we're continuing to do this important work, and this is work that's rather painstaking in making sure that were carefully reviewing the files, putting the national security interests of the United States first, and doing the important work with countries around the world to try to find a suitable location where these individuals can be transferred.

Our stated goal of closing the prison is still rooted in the ideas that closing the prison would be good for taxpayers because it's prohibitively expensive to continue to run it, and our view is also that continuing to have the prison open only serves to advance the recruiting interests of extremist organizations that do view the continued operation of the prison at Guantanamo Bay as an effective recruitment tool.

And this is not just an observation that was made by the Obama administration.  Senior officials who served in President Bush’s administration said the same thing and have advocated for the closure of the prison for the same reasons.  So this has bipartisan support among national security professionals that this is a prison that should be closed.  And we continue to be strongly opposed to the politically motivated effort by the Congress to prevent and obstruct the successful closure of the prison.

Q    I want to last ask you about the comments you made earlier about what happened in Italy.  You said it would be a mistake, you said, to oversimplify.  But would you at least acknowledge the there is a populist wave that appears to be happening throughout Europe?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, I think that's overly stated just because we saw the outcome in Austria --

Q    Would you also acknowledge, given that history in contributing -- one of their citizens being one of the most reviled in all of history might sort of set them separate.  I'm not suggesting that they’re somehow not from that community, the European Community, but I am suggesting is when you see what happened in France, Brexit, now Italy, there seems to be a building populism.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I think what is true is -- and this is true irrespective of the election outcomes -- I think it is true that there are people in Europe who are frustrated that the current state of the economy doesn’t allow them to meet the aspirations that they have set for themselves and their family.  And they are looking for answers.

And the President made the point on a number of occasions that policymakers need to be focused on expanding economic growth and looking for ways to drive that growth, both by investing in the citizens of their country, but also in making investments in local markets to try to spur that economic growth.  That would be good for the global economy but also would be good for the living conditions and the aspirations of the people in their country.

And there's a reaction on the part of some people to give into the temptation to try to withdraw from the international community, the sense that there will be a bigger slice of the pie, so to speak, to enjoy if you build fences around the country and prevent other people from getting access to the pie.  That actually flies in the face of a strategy that's rooted in using our interconnected, integrated world to grow the size of the pie, and give more workers the opportunity to succeed, and ensure that the economic growth and productivity and economic benefits of globalization are not just enjoyed by those at the top but that that prosperity is enjoyed by everybody.

Q    Is that message winning?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, look, I think that this is a fundamental question that is facing leaders all around the world, not just in Europe, and there's a fundamental tension here that needs to be resolved.  And, again, I think this is something that we can say irrespective of election outcomes because I think there's nothing that was on the ballot in Italy that was directly related to the EU or to the prospect of Italy leaving the EU.  But, look, I think these are broader trends that leaders all around the world are going to have to confront.

Ron.

Q    Just quickly on the Oakland fire.  The federal involvement in that was just support, resources?  Is that the extent of it now?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, the role of the federal government is to offer assistance to local officials who are dealing with the situation.  And right now, local officials are engaged in a painstaking effort to comb through the remains of the fire in search of additional people who may have died in the fire, but also in carefully investigating this particular incident.  And I know that some law enforcement officials have locally indicated their intent to consider this from a criminal angle.  I'd refer you to them for the investigation.

Q    That's the part I was wondering about.  Is there federal concern about some of these issues that have been raised about inspections, about the -- that people were living in a place that apparently wasn't a home or a residential environment? Is that part of your -- the federal government's concern and involvement?

MR. EARNEST:  These regulations that relate to building codes and fire codes are something that are administered at the local level.  So I'm not aware of any involvement by the Department of Justice in this matter, but you should check with them to confirm.

Q    And just lastly on the transition.  We're a few weeks into now, and I know you don't want to comment on specific appointments and so on and so forth, but there are a number of issues that have been raised about the President-elect's businesses and conflicts of interests, some appointees have raised some eyebrows -- the national security advisor, counsel to the President, the head of Health and Human Services, for example.  There have been these phone calls with foreign leaders that have raised some issues.  Is the President still satisfied with the way things are going?  And you've said his goal was for a smooth and I think you even used the word successful transition.  Does he still see that happening now, given where we are?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ron, I think this is a situation where the President is focused on making sure that this administration is doing everything possible that we can and doing everything that is under our control to facilitate a smooth and effective transition into the next presidency.

Obviously, this administration is not going to be in a position to offer them personnel advice or certainly not advice that would be unsolicited from the podium, or to try to help them craft what sort of policies they want to implement.  If they're interested in the advice of members of the President's transition team, then they certainly know how to seek out that advice, and the President's team stands ready to share it.  But ultimately, what the President and his team are focused on is making sure that we are taking everything that is under our control, and orienting it in the direction of ensuring a smooth and effective transition that will give the incoming President and his team the best opportunity to succeed at uniting and leading the country.  Whether or not the incoming administration is oriented effectively to take advantage of that opportunity is something that you have to ask them about.

Q    Increasingly, though, more is not under your control or the President's control.  Is there some tension, some feeling that he has of his inability to shape events?  And while, again, you're trying to make this effective and facilitate what the incoming administration wants to do, there's obviously these contradictions between what the President would like them to be doing versus what they are doing.  How does he reconcile that?  Is it just that the election has consequences and you just have to -- you can't throw your hand up and walk away?  To what extent is he trying to influence events in terms of policy and so forth for the transition?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, what this President is trying to do is to make sure that his team is oriented in such a way that we can provide all of the cooperation and information that the next President's team requires to get off to a running start.  And President Obama believes that that is in the best interest of the country to do that and that's why we are focused on that direction.

Look, the truth of the matter is that even if Secretary Clinton had won the election, it's still likely that her team would be sending signals about making changes to policies that President Obama kind of liked.  So this is the nature of a democracy and this is the nature of a peaceful transfer of power -- that the person who’s been in office for eight years has to willingly give up power and give up influence and give up authority.

Q    But sometimes that's very difficult to accept.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, look, I think that's -- well, I guess what I would say is that's the reason it doesn’t happen in most places.  Most countries in the world, they don’t have this kind of process, and for most of human history, the process has been bloody and has been a transition by force.  That's the genius of our system.  And it does require the person who's currently sitting in that office to put the interest of the country ahead of its own political preferences.  That's absolutely true.  But that is a responsibility that President Obama has embraced, and the country is better off for it.

Maggie.

Q    You've announced that Prime Minister Abe will be visiting Pearl Harbor as the first Japanese Prime Minister to do so.  This is right after President Obama went to Hiroshima as the first sitting U.S. President to do so since the bombing.  Why are these historic visits happening now?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, obviously the decision by Prime Minister Abe to travel to Pearl Harbor is a decision that he made, and he issued a statement today indicating that is he hopeful that his visit will be an indication of how adversaries have an opportunity to reconcile their differences and pursue a peaceful future together as allies.  That's certainly what happened between the United States and Japan.  And there are Presidents in both parties that have sought to advance those shared goals, and certainly Japanese prime ministers in a variety of parties that have sought to advance those shared goals.  I know that Prime Minister Abe also indicated his desire to travel to Pearl Harbor as a show of respect for those who died on that day.

So, look, President Obama visited Hiroshima earlier this year.  It was a powerful image seeing the American President and the Japanese Prime Minister standing side by side in that city.  And I would expect that seeing the Japanese Prime Minister and the American President standing side by side in Pearl Harbor, at the memorial of the USS Arizona, just a couple of weeks after the 75th anniversary of that attack I think will be similarly powerful.  And I think it is just one more occasion for us to remember the substantial sacrifice and the remarkable patriotism of the greatest generation of Americans.

President Obama's grandfather played an important role in World War II in terms of signing up to fight for his country, and remembering that Greatest Generation of Americans, his grandfather is obviously at the forefront of his mind.  But millions of Americans, I think, certainly can spend some time this week remembering the remarkable contribution and the remarkable sacrifice that millions of Americans made to ensure that the United States emerge victorious from World War II.

Q    When President Obama visited Hiroshima, was this visit by the Prime Minister already in the works?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, there had always been a number of conversations between the U.S. President and the Prime Minister of Japan about the symbolic value of an American presidential visit to Hiroshima.  And I know there had been discussions previously about the Japanese Prime Minister visiting Pearl Harbor, as well.  I think if the two were directly linked, they probably would have been announced simultaneously, but they were not.  But, look, there have always been discussions about these important symbolic gestures, and there's no downplaying the significance of the Japanese Prime Minister's decision to visit Pearl Harbor just three weeks after the 75th anniversary of the attacks there.

Sarah.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  A couple of questions related to the transition and the President's stated commitment to it.  First, there have been some Democratic senators on the Hill who have talked about seeing what happened to Chief Judge Garland, to now Attorney General Loretta Lynch, and saying that maybe they should kind of not really rush on President-elect Trump's nominees.  The President knows how important it is to have people in his Cabinet when he's getting up and running.  How does he feel about the idea of slow-walking Trump's nominees?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, look, there is the stated fact about the way that Chairman Grassley handled his business over the course of the last year, or couple of years.  Attorney General Loretta Lynch, the first African American woman to serve as the Attorney General of the United States, waited longer than her six or seven predecessors combined to be confirmed into that job.  Why Republicans imposed that kind of delay on her candidacy and her nomination I think is something that only they can explain.

With regard to Chief Judge Garland, he has waited more than 200 days for action in the Senate Judiciary Committee, and we’ve heard from Chairman Grassley a blanket refusal to even consider his nomination despite the fact he’s got more experience on the federal bench than any other Supreme Court nominee in American history, despite the fact that Republicans acknowledge that he represents a consensus pick, and despite the fact that he is somebody who has served his country bravely, including investigating and prosecuting the perpetrators of one of the worst terrorist attacks on American soil.

But when President-elect Trump signals his intent to nominate an attorney general, Chairman Grassley kicks the squeaky wheels of the Senate judiciary conformation process into motion. And I do think it reflects an unprecedented injection of partisanship into what had previously been a committee that went to some length to try to prevent partisan politics from infecting the process.

But under the purview of Chairman Grassley, it’s clear that the process hasn’t just been infected but they’ve got a full-blown fever of partisanship.  But when you are the Republican chair of the committee presiding over a partisan committee and considering the nominees of the Republican President, I guess it’s smooth sailing.  We’ll see.

Q    So he doesn’t have advice or a sort of principled suggestion to Democrats about how they should handle --

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I think individual Senate Democrats are going to have to decide on their own.  But I do feel confident that they’ll consider the merits of the nominees that are handed down, but how they want to respond to that is something that will be ultimately left to them.

Q    And a question that I want to distance from Ron’s a little bit, but it’s sort of along a similar line.  You’ve talked about how -- and the President has talked about how important it is to have a smooth transition and how it’s kind of his last big priority to really make sure that his staff is doing everything that they can to help the incoming Trump team.  Is that incoming Trump team taking advantage of all that cooperation and information that -- and you used the word -- that the incoming President requires to have a successful start?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, I’ll refer you to the President-elect to assess how well his transition team is performing.  I’m not going to hand out grades from here.  What I can tell you is that the President’s team is focused on making sure we’re doing everything we can to facilitate a smooth and effective transition.  But ultimately, how well the President-elect is served by his team is something that he’ll have to assess.

Q    And so you or President Obama will not be issuing any sort of opinion or pulling back the curtain at all about how the process is actually going.

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I think that there are a number of ways in which we’ve tried to characterize exactly how the process is going, but I certainly wouldn’t want me handing out a grade, if you will, to affect the ability of people to do their jobs.  Ultimately, if I stand up here and sort of offer up a new assessment where, in my view, they may or may not have fallen short, that may not lend itself to the kind of cordial, professional, collegial relationships that will contribute to the most effective transition.

So this is just one of those situations that crops up all too frequently when I’m standing at this podium at least, where discretion is the better part of valor, I guess, a little bit here.

Gardiner.

Q    Josh, this administration has made a huge priority out of responding to online threats from jihadists.  You have a whole set of people at the State Department; you have them at the Pentagon; you’ve got people who have gone after those who posted these messages and killed them in the Middle East.  The administration has gone to Silicon Valley and had conversations with Twitter and social medial companies about making sure they crack down on these jihadi threats.  You had an entire set of businesses up here on Connecticut Avenue for months getting direct death threats, and they said that nothing was done about them.  Is it only a priority if these are jihadi threats?  And is it not a priority for this administration if businesses and normal people are getting death threats and being terrorized for months with no action on the part of this administration?  Help me understand the difference there.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Gardiner, I would strongly disagree with the assessment that somehow the administration had not done anything to respond to this situation, particularly when it comes to violent threats.  I’ll refer you to my colleagues at the Department of Justice and the FBI for the role that they may have played in investigating those threats.

I'd also refer you to the Metropolitan Police Department here in Washington for a discussion of any work that they may have done to ensure that the D.C. residents who were patronizing those establishments were able to do so safely.

Q    Did you know the FBI investigated this and went after the people who had given those threats over the course of these many months, despite the fact that the business owners themselves say nothing has been done?

MR. EARNEST:  I can't speak about any sort of criminal investigations.  I do know that it is a matter of standard practice that if people are threatened with violence, that that raises significant legal questions, and legal questions that must be checked out.  And whether that is local law enforcement or federal law enforcement, that's something that they have to work out among themselves.

Obviously there's a joint terrorism taskforce that in some cases can pool resources to ensure that those investigations are conducted using the best practices that are maintained by individual agencies.  But the safety and security of the public is the President's highest priority, and that's true when it comes to administering our national security policy around the globe, but it's also true when we're fighting crime here in the United States.  And the administration has a quite strong record that we're proud of in terms of the impact of some of our crime-fighting policies and our investments in local law enforcement agencies on the overall crime rate.

But yes, I would quibble with the notion that somehow -- in fact, I wouldn't just quibble; I would strongly disagree with the notion that the administration had done nothing in the face of these threats.

Q    I think everyone in this room has gotten threatening emails and threatening things on social media and the rest.  Again, the administration specifically went to Silicon Valley, had these meetings to talk about what these companies were doing about their response to threats from abroad.  I guess what I'm asking -- I've never heard you talk about what the administration is doing, even not just on a law enforcement basis but a policy basis, reaching out to these Silicon Valley companies.  I mean, the President has recently been discussing the problem of fake news on Facebook.  Why hasn't there been a concern -- a growing concern on the part of the administration about what seems to be a growing amount of vitriol directed at a variety of people, sometimes violent vitriol, within the United States?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Gardiner, I think over the course -- over the last year or two, you've heard the President I think speak quite bluntly about the rhetoric that was being used in the context of this political campaign, and the impact that that could have on the broader political debate and the climate -- political climate in the country.  So I do think this is something that we have talked about, and it's something that the President is concerned that that kind of harsh, sometimes violent, rhetoric obscures legitimate policy debates that we should be having in this country.

So with regard to the role of Silicon Valley and some of these technology companies and the role that they can play in policing the standards for people who use their platform, I know that's something that they've had a broad internal debate about, as well.

Obviously, there are some important First Amendment issues that come into play when we're having this discussion.  Those First Amendment issues aren't prioritized in the same way when we're talking about overseas terrorist organizations that don't enjoy the same kinds of protections that American citizens do.

But the same observation that I made about these technology companies with regard to the use by terrorists of these platforms also applies to some of the harsh rhetoric that we've seen.  And it's simply this:  That many of the entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley didn't develop this technology to make it easier for hate to be propagated online.  Their idea was to build a community where people could more effectively communicate and engage in commerce.

So they've got their own built-in interest in protecting the First Amendment rights of their users while also creating a community and a platform that people actually want to use.  And yes, if you do administer a platform that is used extensively to propagate hate and to inspire acts of violence, well, I think most people are going to be less likely to use the platform.

So this is the kind of balance that these technology companies are going to have to strike, and it’s something that I know that they’ve been grappling with for some time.  In some cases, I know that they’ve been doing it even outside the context of politics.

Q    Do you think the market just will have to police itself on that then?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, look, I don’t think it necessarily has to be -- I think there is a -- given the First Amendment questions that are raised, the role for the government to play in all of this is going to be necessarily limited by that.  But I don’t think it eliminates the possibility that the U.S. government could contribute to a productive, fruitful conversation about the effective administration of these online platforms to ensure that people’s lives aren’t at risk.

Q    What will happen to the Aleppo insurgents who don’t leave?  Russia says they will be regarded as terrorists and risk death.  Can you help with that?  These are obviously, in many cases, people who have been supported by the United States.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I can say about this is that we know that it has been the strategy of the Syrian government, backed by the Russians and the Iranians, to bomb innocent civilians into submission.  And the focal point of much of that bombing campaign has been eastern Aleppo.

It’s a bloody tactic.  It’s disgraceful.  And it’s heartbreaking because of the scale of innocent lives lost.  It’s why the United States has been working so tenaciously through diplomatic channels to try to bring the bombing campaign and the violence to an end, or at least reduce it enough that innocent people can get out of harm’s way and humanitarian assistance can be consistently provided.

But there hasn’t been a willingness on the part of either the Syrians, the Russians or the Iranians to engage in that process particularly constructively, and at least in a way that would yield a sustainable outcome.  Hopefully, that will change.  Hopefully, there’s more progress that we can make.  And hopefully the Russians will show some renewed interest in this.  And we would welcome that change.  But far too many lives have been lost and, yes, it’s true that even more are at risk because of the deplorable tactics that are used regularly by the Syrians with the support of the Russians and Iranians.

Q    Josh, when the Prime Minister from Japan comes to the Pearl Harbor Memorial -- one of the reasons this hasn’t happened for so long is the Japanese don’t feel that they have anything to apologize for generally.  They feel that the attack grew out of the oil embargo and all this.  So how are veterans’ groups going to react with Abe showing up and just sort of bowing but no apology?  Is there not going to be an apology?  And how do you think that’s going to play in the United States?  Because from the United States’ point of view, of course, the Pearl Harbor attack was completely unjustified and a total surprise, and an act of total violence and war that was, from our perspective -- there is no justification for it whatsoever.

So, I mean, this was obviously a problem when the President went to Hiroshima -- there were people in Japan who believed the United States shouldn’t have dropped the atomic weapon; we don’t feel that way.  So how is this going to play out?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I don’t want to prejudge at this point what Prime Minister Abe may choose to say when he visits Pearl Harbor.  I think that most Americans would warmly receive the sentiment that he expressed in his statement earlier today.  He indicated that he will visit Pearl Harbor, together with President Obama, to “mourn the souls of the victims.”  He continued saying, “I would like to express my resolve toward the future that the tragedy of wars should never be repeated again.  At the same time, I’m hoping to make it an opportunity to send out a message about the value of reconciliation between Japan and the United States.”

So again, I think the kind of sentiment that’s being expressed by the Prime Minister of Japan is one that would be warmly received by most Americans.  But, obviously, the benefits of a visit like this is it displays the kind of opportunity that lies for America’s future, that lies ahead.

Not long ago, within the lifetime of many Americans, the United States and Japan were at war.  And hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of our citizens were killed in that war.  And 70 years later, the United States and Japan actually have formed an alliance that has benefitted both our countries and our national security and our economy.  And I think this visit further underscores the benefits of pursuing peace and reconciliation.

Q    But you don’t think people are going to sort of see the guy coming from a country that caused the deaths to occur saying simply, well, we’ll mourn the deaths but I’m not going to say that I even feel bad about causing the deaths?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, I can’t speak for every single American and how they will respond to or react to this particular situation.  If I were a World War II veteran who was drafted by the United States military to go and fight for our country overseas in the aftermath of the Pearl Harbor attack, I might feel quite embittered.  And I think it would be a perfectly natural and understandable human reaction to not be particularly satisfied with the words of the Japanese Prime Minister.

But I think the thing that we know about the Greatest Generation of Americans is they’re anything -- well, let me say it this way.  This Greatest Generation of Americans, I think we take a risk if we underestimate their patriotism and their capacity to set aside their own personal interests and prioritize the ambition and opportunity of the American people.

And so, yes, there may be some who feel personally embittered.  But I’m confident that many will set aside their own personal bitterness, not because they’re personally satisfied by the words of the Prime Minister, but because they recognize how important this moment is for the United States.  And that’s certainly why they qualify to be described as the greatest generation.

Jared.

Q    Josh, earlier you said that some of the calls by the President-elect could potentially undermine some of the progress that’s been made with the relationship with China.  You’ve also said and the President has said that we’re in a situation where we have one President at a time.  Do any of the calls or any of the other actions that have been taken at this point by the President-elect nibble around the edges or even take a big bite out of this concept of "one President at a time"?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, I did not participate in any of the phone calls that the President-elect has made over the last several weeks.

Q    But you’re aware of the reaction to them.

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah, I’m aware of the reaction to them but I’m not aware of what he said in them, so that’s why it’s hard for me to assess whether or not this would erode a principle that the President-elect and his team have strongly supported, which is the idea that there’s one President at a time.

Q    When we’re talking about the President-elect still in his capacity as a private citizen, does anything that he’s done approach a violation of the Logan Act, any prohibition against someone who’s not in an elected office making arrangements on behalf of the state or government of the United States?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware of the finer points of the Logan Act, so there may be somebody else that you consult on that one.

Q    Senator Cruz has said that he would rather the President-elect talk to Taiwan than talk to Cuba or Iran.  What do you make of that statement?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess the first thing I would point out is that there are any number of American officials who are in touch with Taiwanese authorities on a regular basis.

Q    He was talking about the implications of these unprecedented calls or thawing relationships that are long frozen.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, the relationship between the United States and Taiwan is an unofficial one, but it's not frozen.  After all, Taiwan is the ninth largest trading partner with the United States.

Mark.

Q    Josh, are you saying that, in the White House view, the President-elect's phone call the Taiwan President or the phone call that he had with the Taiwanese President is a breach of the Shanghai Communiqué in and of itself?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think what is clear -- I think this is just an objective fact -- for the last 40 or so years, there hasn't been another phone call between the President of the United States or a President-elect of the United States and President Tsai or one of her predecessors.  So that's just a fact.

What this administration has pursued very carefully is a one-China policy that promotes peace and stability in the strait.  And that's served the United States well.  It served our ability to work effectively with Chinese authorities, and it's also served our ability to work effectively with Taiwanese authorities.  But if President-elect Trump and his team have a different goal in mind or a different strategy in mind, I'll leave it to them to articulate what those goals might be and what strategy they intend to pursue to achieve them.

Q    Would the administration like a clarification of what their goals are?

MR. EARNEST:  I'm not -- look, I'll leave it to the President-elect and his team to communicate what they would like about his strategy or the policy that they intend to pursue.  I think what I can do is do my best to describe to you the strategy that we have pursued and the significant benefits that have been enjoyed by the United States and the American people as a result of that strategy.

If he's got a different strategy that he intends to pursue in pursuit of some different goals and some different benefits, then I'll leave it to him to articulate that.  Thus far, I think it's kind of hard to see exactly what that would be when you consider that the reaction from the Chinese has been to ramp up or ratchet up their rhetoric that is aimed at Taiwan.  I'm not sure how that benefits the United States, and I'm not sure how that benefits the United States relationship with Taiwan.  I'm not sure how that benefits the Taiwanese people.  I'm not sure how that benefits the U.S. relationship with China.  But I'll leave it to the President-elect and his team to offer up those explanations.

Q    And on the Pearl Harbor visit, is it your understanding that both leaders will be making speeches at that visit?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, when President Obama visited Hiroshima, both leaders had an opportunity to make statements, but I think they stopped short of something that could be described as a speech.  And I think in this setting, I would expect that you'll have an opportunity to hear from both leaders at the memorial site.

Q    You said it was Prime Minister Abe's decision to come, but clearly it was coordinated with the White House, correct?

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, it was.  There were discussions.  In fact, President Obama and Prime Minister Abe had an opportunity to discuss the potential of this visit when they spoke in Lima, at the APEC Summit just a few weeks ago.

Bill Press.

Q    Josh, does the President have a candidate for the next head of the Democratic National Committee?

MR. EARNEST:  The President has not endorsed any of the candidates for DNC Chair, and I don’t anticipate that he will.

Q    So would you say then that of the three candidates remaining -- Jamie Harrison, or Ray Buckley, or Congressman Keith Ellison -- that the President would be happy with any one of the three as the next DNC Chair?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t anticipate that the President is going to weigh in particularly aggressively in support or against any of the candidates.

Q    Well, that leads to my third question, which is, if the President has said that he recognizes that the Democratic Party needs a lot of work to get back on top and start winning, particularly at the state legislative level and governors races because of reinforcement -- so if the President really intends, and he says he's going to focus on that in his post-presidency, he's going to focus on that, wouldn’t he have an opinion about the person that he's going to be working with as head of the DNC?  Or wouldn’t we expect him to?

MR. EARNEST:  He may.  He just may not choose to express it.

Cheryl, I'll give you the last one.

Q    Okay, thanks.  Just quick on the CR that expires Friday --

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah.

Q    -- have you heard from Capitol Hill?  Are they going to have one --

MR. EARNEST:  Still haven’t seen the bill, have we?

Q    Haven't seen the bill yet.  Okay.

MR. EARNEST:  No, we haven’t.  Look, I know there have been a number of discussions, including over the weekend, between officials on Capitol Hill and some officials at the White House.  But this is a basic governing responsibility.  Republicans have the strong majority in both the House and the Senate.  They've already put off passing a budget once, back when the first deadline arose two and a half months ago.  But, look, they've got a deadline to meet on December 9th, and hopefully they'll meet it.

Q    Do you see this going into next week, maybe just a two- or three-day CR?

MR. EARNEST:  I wouldn’t hazard a guess about what the outcome looks like at this point.  But like I said, the original deadline was September 30th.  We're now in the first week in December.  So hopefully Congress will get its act together, and the Republicans who lead both chambers of Congress will fulfill the most basic responsibility that Congress has, which is to pass a budget and ensure the government doesn’t shut down.

Thanks, everybody.  Have a good rest of the day.

END
2:41 P.M. EST
12:46 P.M. EST

MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Happy Monday.  I do not have any announcements at the top so we can go straight to your questions.

Darlene, would you like to go first?

Q    Thank you.  So over the weekend, Donald Trump's chief of staff said the President-elect now accepts that Russia was behind the hacking of the DNC and Hillary Clinton's campaign chairman.  And I was wondering if having Reince Priebus come out and say that Donald Trump now accepts the intelligence community's findings, is that enough for the White House?  Or do you think that people need to hear Donald Trump come out and say that himself?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I'm not going to call on the President-elect to make any statements.  Obviously, the American people and the world are watching as he and his team do the work to prepare to take over the most powerful job in the world.  And so then obviously this entire process is being closely scrutinized, and it should be.  That shouldn't be particularly surprising.  That's been true of the 44 other Presidents of the United States and it's not particularly surprising that people are closely watching the 45th President as he prepares to take office.

And obviously the intelligence community has provided a rigorous analysis of the malicious activity carried out by Russia in cyberspace that was intended to interfere with our election.  It was intended to harm the prospects of the President-elect's opponent in the election.  These are well-established facts, and obviously the world will continue to watch how Mr. Trump and his team -- the President-elect and his team choose to respond.

Q    The President said in at least one interview last week that he hoped that after Donald Trump was briefed by the intelligence leaders last Friday, that some of the tensions between the President-elect and the intelligence community would ease.  So wouldn't that happen if Donald Trump comes out and says, you know, I accept that Russia was behind this?  Wouldn't a statement from him sort of contribute to this easing of tensions that the President spoke about last week?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, what President Obama was talking about was his own experience.  And what his own experience told President Obama is that he benefitted enormously from the men and women of the United States intelligence community providing him with the best available, most timely information.  And the President counted on the intelligence community to provide him information that wasn't shaded to advance any ideological agenda. It was not influenced by politics.  And it was presented without any concern that President Obama or anyone on his team was going to exact retribution for the information that was presented.  And the President of the United States benefitted from getting an unvarnished assessment from the intelligence community about the state of the world and facts about the state of the world.

And President Obama believed that that improved his decision-making, and he believes that President Trump would benefit from having that kind of relationship with the intelligence community as well.

Q    On another subject, a couple of years ago, Meryl Streep was here at the White House for the Presidential Medal of Freedom Award.  The President talked a lot about how much he loves her.  Does he think her speech last night at the Golden Globes was appropriate, that that ceremony was the appropriate venue to talk about Donald Trump?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven't spoken to the President about her speech.  I didn't see her speech, but I certainly read about it. It seemed to get plenty of attention.  And I think what I can say is she clearly was delivering a thoughtful, carefully considered message that she believes in deeply.  And it seemed to me to be a fairly straightforward exercise of her First Amendment rights as a citizen of the United States.

Q    Ever since the election, he's been very reluctant to repeat a lot of the criticisms that he lodged against Donald Trump during the campaign.

MR. EARNEST:  And the reason for that is that he's got institutional responsibilities.  He's the President of the United States, and once the election is over, his chief responsibility is to ensure a smooth and effective transition to the incoming administration.  I'm not aware that the United States Constitution includes any institutional responsibilities for the lifetime award winner of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association.

Q    So Hollywood doesn't have to move on?

MR. EARNEST:  What I'm suggesting is that American citizens have the opportunity to exercise their right to free speech in any way that they choose.  And certainly when it comes to standing up for deeply held values, the American people get to choose how and when and whether to express those sentiments.

President Obama is in a different position because he's got institutional responsibilities.  He's got strongly held political views that he frequently and passionately conveyed on the campaign trail, and those views have not changed, as I've said on a number of occasions.  But because of his institutional responsibilities as President of the United States to ensure a smooth and effective transition to the next President, he has to set aside those personal feelings in order to preside over an effective transition and give the incoming team every advantage associated with a running start.  And the President has faithfully presided over a process that's done exactly that.

Ayesha.

Q    Thank you.  Going on to another topic, Taiwan's President had a stopover in Houston on Sunday, and she met with some Republican lawmakers.  I was wondering, what's the White House's response to that, and to the seeming -- these kind of -- I mean, this follows President-elect Trump's phone call with the President of Taiwan.  What does the White House make of these actions?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the U.S. policy with regard to Taiwan has not changed.  And the President and this administration have pursued that one China policy in the same way that previous administrations have because we believe that it best serves the national security interests of the United States.  We also happen to believe it serves well the interests of our friends in Taiwan.

So I'm not sure whether or not Senator Cruz and his team was acting on behalf of the President-elect.  They obviously have a rather unique relationship -- so you'd have to ask them -- ask him that.  And obviously the incoming administration will determine whether or not to continue this policy once President-elect Trump takes office on January 20th.  But as of now, there's nothing about the meeting that took place over the weekend that in any way changed U.S. policy with regard to Taiwan.

Q    Does the White House feel that meeting shouldn't have happened?  Like, would the White House be supportive -- was the White House supportive of that meeting?  Does the White House have a view on that meeting taking place?

MR. EARNEST:  The meeting was one that was arranged at Senator Cruz's own initiative, as far as I know.  It certainly wasn't coordinated or encouraged by the administration.  And the meeting doesn't have any bearing whatsoever on our continued pursuit of a one China policy that benefits the United States and Taiwan.

Q    On one more topic.  A U.S. Navy destroyer fired three warning shots at some Iranian fast-attack vessels on Sunday, I believe.  Can you talk about -- this was the latest incident.  There have been a number of these incidents at the -- where there have been kind of aggressive measures and then the U.S. has kind of taken action to kind of stop these aggressive measures happening at sea.  I mean, is this a concern, especially as we're about to go -- we're in a transition period, we're about to go to a new presidency?  Is Iran -- like, what may be behind these -- what may be behind these incidents and what is your concern that they keep -- that they continue to happen?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ayesha, you're wise to point out that this is -- that there is a habit of the Iranian military engaging in these kinds of activities in this particular region around the Strait of Hormuz.  And I can tell you that the United States is aware of the latest incident involving Iranian vessels and the USS Mahan.  As the Department of Defense has indicated, the actions were unsafe and unprofessional.  These, of course, are the actions that were taken by the Iranian vessels.

At this point, the United States does not know what the intentions of the Iranian vessel were, but the behavior is not acceptable, given that the USS Mahan was operating in international waters.  So these types of actions are certainly concerning and certainly risk escalating tensions.  It is our view that we should look for ways to deescalate tensions, not unnecessarily escalate them.

So as we've repeatedly noted, the Strait of Hormuz -- as anybody with access to a map can confirm -- is a compressed space, which enhances the likelihood, or at least potential, for miscalculations.  And that's certainly something that we would like to avoid.

So for additional details on the incident about how it -- for a detailed assessment of what exactly transpired, I'd refer you to the Department of Defense.  But it certainly is the view of the United States that these kinds of actions are concerning because of the potential that they could unnecessarily escalate tensions.

Q    So, I mean, obviously -- I mean, this is -- I mean, you guys are at the end of your tenure here, but I mean, President-elect Trump has said that -- has threatened to shoot any Iranian vessel out of the water -- or any Iranian vessel that harasses a U.S. Navy ship will be shot out of the water.  I mean, what do you think about those threats?  That clearly hasn't been -- this administration's approach has not been to aggressively go back when this harassment has occurred.  I guess, what -- do you think that more needs to be done?  Or does the administration believe that more is going to need to be done to deal with this?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, certainly it is a blanket policy of this administration that U.S. service members have the ability to protect themselves and can exercise that capability when they're threatened directly.  But our goal, particularly in this compressed region of the world, is to avoid escalating tensions. And the risk associated with the kinds of actions that we saw from the Iranian vessels is the heightened possibility that tensions could escalate, and that certainly is something that we've gone to great lengths to avoid.

Michelle.

Q    Now that Americans have been able to see the report -- the public portion of it, at least -- on the Russian hacking, some of the criticism out there has been that it's not exactly heavy on evidence.  And we heard Julian Assange just this morning call it embarrassing.  How would you respond to those criticisms?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the report is actually consistent with what the administration and national security and intelligence officials have been saying for months.  The analysis that was put forward by the CIA, by the FBI and the NSA makes clear Russia's culpability for these actions.  It makes clear what Russia's intent was.

Now, the unclassified version of the report that was released prioritized the need to inform the American people about what exactly transpired, but there was an urgent priority to protect sources and methods, and make sure that the United States could retain the ability to protect the American people and protect our cyber infrastructure here in the United States.  So it means that in order to protect those sources and methods, we were not prepared to make public how exactly each of these pieces of information was known.  But the fact that the vast majority of this report includes the high-confidence assessment of the FBI, the CIA and the NSA I think should send a pretty powerful message about just how comprehensive this evidence is.

And again, this is a report that was compiled and put forward by intelligence officials who dedicate their lives to the safety and security of the United States.  They are experts in their field.  They are not engaged in this activity because it makes them rich, or it makes them fame, or it earns them glory. They do it because they're interested in protecting the country. They're patriots.  And all that said, it's not surprising to me that somebody who has become globally infamous for releasing these kinds of secrets may not have a lot of complimentary words to say about the report.

Q    We've also heard some statements from the Trump team saying that because the hacking activity predated the time when it was clear that Donald Trump would be the Republican nominee, it seems like the intent was to hurt the Democratic side but not necessarily help Donald Trump specifically.  Would you agree with that?

MR. EARNEST:  I think the report was pretty blunt in indicating the evolving nature of the intent of the Russian operatives who were engaged in this activity.  But, look, again, you don’t need a security clearance to determine who exactly was harmed by this hack-and-leak strategy and who benefitted from it. So setting the report aside, I think you'd have a really hard time making the case that somehow the Russians were impartial, again, because we know that they hacked Democratic sources and they hacked Republican-affiliated organizations.  But the only information that was leaked in the most damaging possible way was the information that was collected from Democrats in a way that I don’t think anybody thinks benefitted the Clinton campaign.  So at some point, this just isn’t all that complicated.

Q    And this latest rhetoric coming from North Korea that basically anytime and anywhere they can fire off an ICBM, what are you guys making of that?  Is this just more bluster?  I mean, it's almost become like the typical thing -- every two weeks or so there's another kind of provocative statement.  Or are you taking this more seriously than rhetoric?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the Obama administration, the United States, and I think the international community take seriously and is concerned about the destabilizing rhetoric and sometimes destabilizing actions that are undertaken by the regime in North Korea.  And that's why you've seen the United States lead and international response to mobilize the international community to impose the toughest-ever sanctions that have ever been imposed on North Korea because of our concern about their rhetoric and their actions.

And you also heard the Secretary of Defense, Ash Carter, over the weekend indicate that the United States military retains significant capability to protect the United States and our allies, and we're prepared to use that capability when necessary. But our preference is to denuclearize the Korean Peninsula, deescalate tensions, and bring North Korea back into the community of nations.  But right now, because of North Korea's refusal to abide by international obligations when it comes to their nuclear weapons program, they are an outlier, they are excluded, they are isolated in a way that -- certainly more so than any other country in the world.

Justin.

Q    I just wanted to kind of return to what Michelle was talking about.  Obviously, I think the conclusions made by the different branches of the intelligence community were powerful in their confidence.  But it really seemed like there was little, if any, evidence to back up those conclusions, and some of the supplemental material was from reports that was outdated and went back to 2012.  There was very little to show how the information that was hacked by the Russians got to Wikileaks.  Those kinds of connections weren’t made.  Did you guys do yourselves a disservice here by not including a little -- obviously, there could have been more things that were disclosed without violating sources and methods here.  I think that's apparent as sort of the things that you point to as apparent here.  Couldn’t there have been more granted, and doesn't this give critics more ammunition to sort of discount the report?

MR. EARNEST:  I think critics of this report have a very tough row to hoe here.  I think any fair-minded individual would take a look at this report that was put forward by the CIA, the FBI, and the NSA and conclude that they feel quite strongly about the conclusions that they have reached and publicized.  I think any fair-minded individual would understand the careful concern that was taken to protect sources and methods.

This is obviously a threat that exists in cyberspace that persists and has the potential to get worse before it gets better.  And that means these intelligence agencies need to protect the ability of the United States to monitor, detect, and deter these kinds of activities.  And that means that we're not able to make public all of the evidence in place.  But the fact that this is a report that is consistent with the statement that was issued by all 17 intelligence agencies of the United States government back in October, the fact that that initial statement was delivered by all 17 intelligence agencies with high confidence, and the fact that this is a report that these agencies stand behind I think is notable.

And I think that your desire and the desire of the American public for more information is certainly understandable and one that I anticipated.  Plenty of other people did, too.  And that's why the President asked these experts to make as much public as was possible even as they protect the ability of the United States to protect ourselves in cyberspace -- not just from the Russians, but from other malicious activities -- from malicious hackers.

Q    Sure.  Even people who agree that Russia was responsible for the hack have -- who are critics of the administration have pointed to this sort of entire enterprise and said, okay, we knew this before the election.  Hillary Clinton talked about it every day.  Donald Trump was asked about it.  And so this sort of process was an effort by the White House to politically harm or delegitimize Donald Trump by resurfacing the allegations that we've known for a long time.  And as you said, we've known since October or whatever it was.  So I guess without the component of additional evidence to back up the claims, what did we learn on Friday that we didn't already know, or that would sort of help people, I guess, act on this to shield themselves in the future that we didn't know beforehand to sort of answer that criticism?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess, Justin, the best piece of evidence I would point to you about the powerful nature of the report is the changing response from the President-elect and his team.

Q    Well, now, that's not true, because he got a -- so there was the declassified, the classified that Congress will get, and then an even higher level that the President and President-elect received?

MR. EARNEST:  Right.

Q    So there -- inevitably he could have received that higher level briefing without the sort of public report and pressure from --

MR. EARNEST:  So you're suggesting we should have put together this highly classified report and not release any details?  I think the context of this questioning would be quite a bit different if that were the case.

Q    No, I think you should have released more details.

MR. EARNEST:  And what I’m telling you is that the experts in the international community released as many details as they possibly could without risking sources and methods.

So, again, I think your interest in wanting to know more about what happened is understandable and not surprising giving the kind of intellectual interest you typically show in these kinds of briefings.  So I’m not surprised by that.  But I think any other fair-minded person would understand that these are capabilities and resources that the United States government uses to protect the American people and they're critical to our national security, so we can't burn our sources here.  And I think that is a reasonable and responsible conclusion.  And what the international community tried to do is provide as much information as they could even as they were protecting sources and methods.

Olivier.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  John Kerry is issuing an apology on behalf of the State Department for past mistreatment of his LGBT employees.  Is this going to be a government-wide thing?  Should we expect to see other heads of agencies come out and offer the same sentiment?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware of additional plans by other agencies, but certainly I wouldn’t rule it out either.

Q    So this wasn’t directed by the President?  He didn't say at a Cabinet meeting, by the way, let’s look at this possible?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President is -- obviously, the decision that was made by Secretary Kerry today in his statement today is entirely consistent with the President’s view of these issues and certainly is entirely consistent with some of the work that the President and his administration have done in the United States military at the Department of Defense with regard to Americans that have previously been discriminated against because of their sexual orientation.  So this is obviously consistent with the kinds of values that the President has given voice to.  But this is a decision that was made the Secretary of State.

Q    Pakistan said that it’s tested its first sub-launched cruise missile.  I’m wondering if the administration, specifically the White House has a reaction to that.

MR. EARNEST:  I hadn’t seen those reports, Olivier.  So let me look into it and we’ll get back to you.

Cheryl.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  There are a lot of nomination hearings this week.  And I’m wondering, now that Republicans think obstruction is a bad thing, if you think Democrats should allow those nominations to go forward?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I think it’s not just obstruction they think is a bad thing.  Apparently they think that background checks are bad, too.

I just want to read from a February 2009 letter that was signed the Honorable Mitch McConnell, Republican leader of the United States Senate.  And he sent it to Harry Reid, the Democratic then Majority Leader of the United States Senate.  The letter says in part:

“We reaffirm our commitment to conduct the appropriate review of these nominations consistent with the longstanding and best practices of committees regardless of which political party is in the majority.  These best practices serve the Senate well, and we will insist on their fair and consistent application.”

So we can provide all of you copies of this letter.  It’s significant because it lays out eight different principles that they believe are critical to ensure the fair consideration of presidential nominees.  And it includes things like ensuring that an FBI background check is complete and submitted to the committee in time for review and prior to a hearing being noticed.  It also notes, conspicuously, the Office of Government Ethics letter should be complete and submitted to the committee in time for review prior to a committee hearing.

This, of course, is very different than the approach that Republicans are taking with regard to President-elect Trump’s nominees.

What I can tell you is that the Obama administration never asked for a nominee to get a hearing in the United States until their Office of Government Ethics letter was complete.  That is to say, until the Office of Government Ethics, the independent watchdog of the United States government had completed their review to ensure that ethical conflicts had been resolved.

That was a principle that we abided by for eight years.  So I can tell you that it does appear that now Republicans in the Senate are forming their own cheap suit caucus -- and it’s a not commentary on their wardrobe, it’s a commentary on the fact that they are folding like a --

Q    Like a cheap suit --

MR. EARNEST:  -- and rubber-stamping -- thanks for following along -- and rubber-stamping the nominees of the incoming Trump administration --

Q    What happens when you rubber-stamp a cheap suit?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  I guess we're going to find out.  But I think it’s --

Q    Sounds horrible.

MR. EARNEST:  I think that what we've seen here is that the Republicans in the Senate are failing in their effort to advise and consent.  Coming on the heels of the debacle that we saw in the House where House Republicans engineered an effort to gut ethical guidelines on the House, it sounds like a lot of Americans who voted to drain the swamp aren’t getting what they hoped for even before their guy takes office.

Andrew.

Q    Back to Russia.  You've obviously found that Russia sought to influence the U.S. election.  I’m wondering if you've ruled out the possibility that Russia recruited American citizens to that effort, or American citizens were knowingly conspiring with Russia in that regard.

MR. EARNEST:  Andrew, I don't recall having seen anything like that in the unclassified version of the report.  For information that may be included in the classified version, I’d refer you to the intelligence community.  I have not read the classified version.  But if there is more analysis that the intelligence community has to share, you’ll have to check with them directly.

Q    And the report named Putin personally.  Why is he not facing sanctions?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, as we've discussed a couple of times, it is rather extraordinary for the United States to decide to sanction the leader of another country.  I would hastily acknowledge that Russia’s activities with regard to the 2016 election were extraordinary.  But obviously there are a range of factors that go into decisions about who merits sanctioning.  And I think the decision by the United States government to sanction a couple of these Russian government and military entities and some of the -- at least one or two companies that assisted them in this effort I think does reflect the significance of the concern that we have about Russia’s activities in cyberspace.

And I would point out that this is activity -- or I’m sorry -- this is a response that is available to the U.S. government because of the foresight demonstrated by this administration and this President to grant in advance authority to the Secretary of Treasury to use financial sanctions as a potential response to malicious cyber activity.  So this does represent the implementation of a strategy.  And I think, by and large, most people, including the President-elect’s team would acknowledge that the response from the Obama administration has been serious.

And you’ll recall that since this intelligence community assessment about the malicious Russian cyber activity was made public, we indicated that we were aiming for a proportionate response.  And while we have not detailed every element of that response, those elements that are public I think gives you a pretty good indication of just how seriously we treat this matter.

Q    Just a final question.  Do you have any reaction to Rafsanjani’s death?  Do you think it has any impact on the nuclear deal or Iranian government’s policy or position?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me start by acknowledging that former President Rafsanjani was a prominent figure throughout the history of the Islamic Republic of Iran.  And the United States sends our condolences to his family and loved ones.  He was a consequential figure inside Iran.  But for what potential impact this could have on Iranian policy I wouldn’t speculate.

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Can you give me and update on the President’s latest conversation with Turkey’s President and the latest on the Gulen story?  I haven’t heard if there’s an ongoing investigation into whether or not he will be repatriated to that country.  Can you give us an update on it?

MR. EARNEST:  Kevin, as you’ll recall, the President did have an opportunity to talk to President Erdoğan last week.  The President called to offer his condolences on behalf of the American people to the Turkish people for the many deaths at the Turkish nightclub on New Year’s Eve.

Turkey is obviously a critically important NATO ally of the United States.  And despite our occasional differences, we value the strong partnership that we have with Turkey, particularly when it comes to protecting the national security of citizens of both of our countries.  And President Obama has dedicated a significant portion of his presidency to strengthening the NATO alliance, including the ability of the United States to work closely with Turkey to protect our national security.

With regard to Mr. Gulen, the Department of Justice has, for a number of months now, been working closely with their Turkish counterparts to determine what sort of evidence is available to support the petition for his extradition that was issued by the Turkish government.  I haven’t gotten a recent update on that effort, but I know how seriously the Department of Justice was undertaking that effort, so I’d refer you to them for an update.
Q    Is it your expectation that that would be something that could possibly be wrapped up before the President leaves office?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't know what the time frame is for completing that investigation.  Obviously, this is an investigation that was going to be conducted jointly with Turkish officials, and it was going to develop evidence pursuant to the extradition treaty that exists between the United States and Turkey and has for some time.  But I don't know what the time frame is for completing that work.

Q    I don't want to step on the speech itself, but I’d love to get a readout of your expectation of the President’s comments in Chicago.  And in particular, do you expect him to address at least at the micro level why some of the successes that he’s had at the macro level have not sort of translated down into the city of Chicago, in particular in the African American community, which has just been hit by such devastation in terms of violence, et cetera?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, the first thing I can confirm for you is there’s still a lot of work that needs to be done on the speech.  So the President will be doing a lot of thinking between now and then, between now and 9:00 p.m. Eastern tomorrow, thinking about what he wants to say and what sort of presentation he wants to make to the American public as he enters the last couple of weeks that he has here at the White House.

I can tell you, in general, that the President is committed to delivering a forward-looking speech that will examine briefly the significant progress that our country has made in the last eight years.  But it will take a closer look and he’ll spend more time talking about what the President believes is necessary for us to confront the challenges that lie ahead.

And most of those solutions, in the mind of the President, rest on the deeply held values that just about every American subscribes to.  And those values include fairness and justice.  It includes the idea that, if you work hard, you should have the opportunity to succeed regardless of what you look like, or what your last name is, or who you love.  And the President believes that obviously the diversity of this country is a strength and that, for all our differences, there’s much more that unites us than separates us.  And our country is stronger when we remember that principle and we draw upon those common values.

But the President will have some more to say about this tomorrow night and is really looking forward to the opportunity to address the American people one last time.

Q    And I also want to ask -- great interview with my colleagues over at GMA.  Tthe President seemed very candid about his time not just remaining in office but also sort of looking ahead to what may lie on the agenda for Democrats looking forward.  And he seemed to be suggesting in his interview that the principles and the ideas as you’ve just laid them out resonated with a great many Americans but they were unable to -- the party was not able to convince enough Americans that they were the right ideas.

He seemed to suggest that, well, they voted for me.  And I kind of took that to say, you know, if I were out there, we would have won this battle.  Am I reading too much into that comment? And was it a matter of messaging or was it a matter of the messenger?


MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the President has made the case, in a variety of settings that the kinds of values and agenda and priorities that he’s laid out over the last eight years continue to enjoy the strong support of the vast majority of the American public.  And that’s true when you consult public opinion polls that rate the President of the United States higher than every other politician in America, and higher than most other Presidents at this stage in their presidency.  So I think that is an indication of the strong support that the American people continue to have for his agenda and for his priorities and for his message.

I think the fact that President Obama was campaigning so aggressively for Secretary Clinton, somebody -- she was the candidate that got the most votes in the last election.  Now, she didn’t win, but if you’re just looking for public support for the message that President Obama was helping her communicate, it’s clear that that was a message that resonated deeply with the American people.  Not sufficiently enough to win the Electoral College, of course, but I think it is an indication of just how deeply the President’s message and his agenda resonates with the American public.

And the President himself has made the observation -- and this is an observation that all of you have made in the context of other elections, 2010 and 2014 in particular -- that despite the President’s best efforts, the President’s message did not succeed in motivating enough people to participate in those elections when the President wasn’t on the ballot.  But obviously, in 2008 and 2012, when Barack Hussein Obama was at the top of the ticket, we saw the American people respond in kind with a majority of support.  So I think that’s an indication of the President standing with the American public and the strong support for his agenda.

But there are questions that he and other Democrats need to answer about what it is that our party can do to ensure that these priorities and these values and this agenda resonates even when the top line of the ticket doesn’t have Obama on it.

April.

Q    Josh, I want to go back to the speech.  How much of this speech is directed to those who are trying to rewrite this President’s history -- those who dismiss things like the fact that Osama bin Laden is no more, those who dismiss the fact that his -- more efforts to look at the issues of criminal justice reform, those people who also don’t like the inclusion of same sex marriage.  Is this an effort to rewrite history, and also focused at those people, the naysayers, to his accomplishments?

MR. EARNEST:  No.  The President is primarily delivering a message to the American people -- all Americans, whether they voted for President Obama or not.  The President feels an obligation to talk about what he’s learned over the last eight years, what he’s learned about the country, what he’s learned about governing the country, and offer up his advice to the American people about the most effective way to confront the challenges that we see ahead.

So that’s the goal.  And there certainly -- the President certainly could give a long speech reciting the many accomplishments of his administration, but that’s not how he’s choosing to spend his time tomorrow night.

Q    So how long is the speech?  You’re talking about several drafts -- it’s almost sounding like a State of the Union kind of thing, where you have the drafts, you go through the drafts and the rewrites.  Is it something like that?  Would you equate it to that?

MR. EARNEST:  I would not.  It will be shorter and much different in style.

Q    So, okay, how much shorter?  I mean, is it going to be like half an hour, less, more?

MR. EARNEST:  We’ll try to give you some guidance tomorrow. I don’t have one to share.

Q    No, I mean, I’m serious because --

MR. EARNEST:  I’m serious, too.  The message of the speech hasn’t been completed yet.  So we’ll give you some updated timing tomorrow.

Q    And lastly, is this more heart or is it more policy?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what you can expect from the President is a heartfelt expression of gratitude to the American people for the trust they’ve shown in him, and a carefully considered collection of thoughts about the challenges that lie ahead and the most effective way for the United States of America to successfully confront them.

Q    And how many drafts is this now?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have a number to share with you on that.

Q    Is it more than five?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have a number to share with you on that.

Stephanie.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Back to Russia.  It seems as though Russia is still aiming to ensure a Trump-Putin meeting takes place early in the new U.S. presidency.  Is this concerning at all, considering the President has made a point to say that we are not on the same team?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, President Obama has met with President Putin on a number of occasions, so I think it’s entirely appropriate that the President of the United States would meet with the President of Russia.  President Obama agreed to participate in those meetings at a time and place of his choosing.  And obviously the incoming President will make his own determination about the appropriate location and about the appropriate timing of those meetings.

Q    And Jared Kushner, President-elect Donald Trump’s sone-in-law, has been named senior advisor in the administration.  And we know Kushner has been one of the most influential voices during the campaign.  Does this raise any questions?  What is the White House’s reaction to this?  Are there any questions of -- maybe legal and ethical questions because of the family ties?

MR. EARNEST:  I know that there are a number of these kinds of questions that have been raised.  I'll let President-elect Trump select whomever he would like to have around him.  Obviously that's what he will do.

What I can tell you is that President Obama and all of those of us who served on his senior staff here in the White House went to great lengths to comply with the strict ethical requirements that the American people expect of people who are entrusted with so much authority.  And President Obama takes great pride in the fact that there has not been a major scandal over the eight years that he’s been in office.

And at least some of that is attributable to the willingness of the people who serve in positions of authority both in the White House and across the federal government to not just abide by the ethical requirements put in place by the Office of Government Ethics, and not just abide by the letter of the law when it comes to ethics, but actually aspire to a higher standard.

And that was a standard that was set by President Obama himself who, when he took office, essentially liquidated his assets and put them into the Treasury bills.  I've noted on a number of occasions that that was not a particularly wise investment decision because this was a time when interest rates were being slashed, but it was the right decision for the country, because it meant that questions about the President’s potential motivation were put to rest because he didn’t have a financial interest in these policies, rather his only interest was in the success of the American people, American middle-class workers and the American economy.

Lynn.

Q    Thank you.  Going back to the tomorrow event, just for some housekeeping, we know that Vice President Biden and the First Lady and Dr. Biden will be there.  Will they also be speaking or introducing?

MR. EARNEST:  They will not.

Q    So when the President talks about the work ahead, what of his legacy organizations might he be thinking about?  What fill can you give me?  Is this OFA?  Is this an entity to be created by the center?  What is the vehicle then that you see him carrying out the forward-looking things he wants to talk about?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I wouldn't -- when the President is giving his speech tomorrow he’s not going to have in mind his own --

Q    I'm not asking you to tell me if it's in the speech.  I'm asking you to tell me what the “it” is, if you know.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess it's hard to answer that question.  I think what I would tell you is the President intends to lay out his own view about the challenges facing the country and the most effective way for the United States to overcome them.  I'll let the President speak at a later date about what sort of activities he'll be engaged in after he leaves the White House to address some of those challenges.

Q    Do you happen to know, will he be swinging by the Obama alumni event taking place also at McCormick Place?

MR. EARNEST:  We'll keep you posted on the President’s schedule.  I'm not sure exactly what all he'll do while he’s there, but we'll certainly keep you posted.

Hans.

Q    If I could follow on that February 2009 letter on OGE.

MR. EARNEST:  Yes.

Q    How important for this administration, back at that time or throughout, was the OGE process.  Did you guys ever learn anything new that made you reconsider a nominee?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, at this point, I don’t think I would say that -- off the top of my head I certainly can’t think of a scenario.

Q    Did the disclosures about Richardson come out in the OGE letter, or a separate investigation?

MR. EARNEST:  That’s ancient history, as far as I’m concerned.  I guess what -- I think what I can tell you is that the standard that the Obama administration lived up to was a standard of ensuring that that OGE ethics letter arrangement was complete before these individuals got a hearing before the United States Congress.

Q    So it was more protocol.  It wasn’t like you guys learned additional stuff that you didn’t pick up in your own vetting.

MR. EARNEST:  It’s certainly possible that there would have been additional information that was unearthed as a result of those kinds of things.  I think the more important thing here, Hans, is not just the background vetting, but also the arrangements that are put in place to ensure that conflicts of interest are eliminated.  And that is what the Office of Government and Ethics can verify, is, what can we do to make sure that this individual doesn’t have some sort of ethical conflict of interest or financial conflict of interest.

The irony here is that a number of questions have been raised about the nominees put forward by the President-elect with regard to their financial conflict of interest.  That’s why it’s particular egregious that Republicans in the United States Congress who previously had so aggressively advocated for ensuring that these ethical arrangements were completed before these hearings were held are now agreeing to hold hearings for nominees that do have obvious financial conflicts of interest that have been widely reported even though they haven’t undertaken the reasonable steps to deal with them.

And again, coupled with the decision by House Republicans to make their first act as the incoming majority in Congress to vote in secret to gut ethics regulations, it certainly has to arouse some concern around those Americans who voted to drain the swamp when they voted for Donald Trump.

Q    It just -- on the timing of it, though, was it fairly fast?  Do you guys ever -- do you remember any delays?  Like was it -- was the process smooth?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, certainly those of us who worked in the Communications Office would have liked to have seen this process move more quickly.  But when you’re trying to move a bunch of nominees through at the same time, in some cases -- particularly in the case of the President-elect’s nominees, some of them have extensive financial holdings.  So I guess the point that I would make is it’s worth the time to make sure that the kinds of ethical arrangements are in place to prevent conflicts of interest from cropping up.

And given the fact that there were no major ethical scandals in this administration, I think that’s an indication that we pursued the right path.  It certainly is the path that was recognized -- recommended by Mitch McConnell eight years ago.  But now he and the rest of the Republicans are poised to fold like a cheap suit.

Q    Just one quick -- I’m sorry for stepping on your metaphor earlier -- you had it all lined up.

MR. EARNEST:  That’s okay.  (Laughter.)

Q    When you look at what the President is directly saying -- because you guys have held back a little bit in terms of, like, giving direct advice -- it is the President’s view that no nominee should be heard before they have the letter from OGE.

MR. EARNEST:  What the President has said is that is the standard that we have maintained, and it’s served him and the American people and his administration very well, as evidenced by the fact in eight years we did not have a major ethical scandal while he was President.

Steven.

Q    Just to button one thing down with respect to the intelligence community’s declassified report -- when he testified on the Hill last week, Director Clapper said that there would be a declassified version released sometime early this week, but it came out Friday, timed relatively close to the President-elect’s briefing.  Was that a decision that was made here in the White House?

MR. EARNEST:  It was not.  That was a decision that was made entirely by the authors of the report -- in this case, the CIA, the FBI, the NSA, and, of course, the Director of National Intelligence.

Q    Not made to preempt any characterization that the President-elect might have?

MR. EARNEST:  Not at all -- well, again, you’d have to talk to them about the timing, but that timing of the report’s release was not in any way directed by the White House.

Q    On the speech tomorrow, can we say that President Obama is himself part of this drafting process?

MR. EARNEST:  You can say that President Obama is the drafting process.  He’s working closely with his speechwriters, but it’s apparent in the drafts that these will be President Obama’s words and no one else’s.

Q    Just one more question.  There was apparently a party here on Friday night.  Is there any chance we can get an on-the-record readout?  There were reports that this thing lasted until 3:30, 4:00 in the morning.

MR. EARNEST:  What I can confirm for you is that the President and the First Lady had a wonderful time seeing so many of their friends.  And from what I could tell, everybody else seemed to have a really nice time as well.

Q    What time did you leave?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  That’s classified.

John.

Q    Thanks a lot, Josh.  There are 11 days left in this administration, and this apology from the Secretary of State comes very late in the administration’s tenure.  Why did this apology to the LGBT community and past employees of the State Department come so late in this administration?

MR. EARNEST:  John, for the timing of this statement, I’d refer you to the Secretary of State’s Office.  I read the statement, but I’m not aware of all of the machinations that went on in the background to make it a reality.  Obviously it does send, I think, a pretty strong message to all Americans that people should be judged not based on who they love or who they are, but based on their capacity to serve this country, and their willingness to set aside their own interests to go and represent the United States of America overseas.

And there are many Americans who have embraced that patriotic duty, and certainly everybody who is qualified to do so should be able to do so and shouldn’t be discriminated against just because of who they love or who they are.

Q    There have been books, documentaries about past discrimination by the federal government against the LGBT community.  Let me just cite two examples.  President Dwight Eisenhower, in an executive order, declared homosexuality a sexual perversion and an issue of national security.  In 1951, the FBI director at the time, J. Edgar Hoover, ordered all FBI agents to identify homosexuals working in the federal government. Does the President owe the LGBT community an apology for this past discrimination?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, John, that’s the first I’m hearing of that reference.  I think President Obama has, throughout his tenure as President worked hard to stand up for the rights of LGBT Americans.  And he’s proud of his record.  Some of that is certainly a consequence of the profound changes in our society that have taken place under a rather short period of time in a way that has made America a more perfect union.

The President has certainly welcomed those developments.  The President has certainly encouraged those developments.  And based on some of the statements that we’ve seen from advocates for this community, the President has played an important role in advancing those developments.

So he’s certainly proud of his record on these issues.  But with regard to an apology for the behavior, or policies or statements of previous Presidents, that’s something we’ll have to take a look at.

Q    So you would not rule that out?

MR. EARNEST:  I wouldn’t rule it out, but I’m not aware that there’s anything that’s being cooked up to officially respond to that at this point.

Sarah.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Does the President have any reaction to the corruption allegations against Prime Minister Netanyahu?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware of any -- I don’t have a specific response for you from here.  Obviously, this is something that’s getting a lot of attention in Israel right now, and it’s certainly something that’s chronicled in newspapers back here in the United States.  But I make a habit of not commenting on criminal inquiries by U.S. law enforcement authorities, and I’m not going to weigh in with comments on criminal inquiries that are being conducted by Israeli law enforcement officials, either.

Q    Completely switching gears, the President has authored quite a few articles in scientific and academic journals lately. Beyond the insatiable intellectual interests in this room, what might be motivating him to do that?

MR. EARNEST:  You and Justin certainly have that in common. Those of you who have covered the President for a long time know that the President is, almost to a fault, a rational guy and the basic underpinnings of his approach to a wide range of policy challenges are rooted in facts.  And the President believes that we should carefully consider those facts.  We should familiarize ourselves with those facts so that we can design the most effective solution.

The President also believes and hopes that the performance of his administration will be judged by facts.  And when you take a look at the metrics, for example, when it comes to climate change -- which was the subject of today’s episode in scientific journals published by President Barack H. Obama -- we’ve demonstrated as a country and as an economy the ability to fight climate change and reduce carbon pollution even as we grow the economy.

We have succeeded in reducing the cost of wind and solar power even as we have expanded the amount of power that we derive from those sources in a way that’s had positive benefits for our economy.  We know that the solar and wind energy industry have increased hiring, and we know that those are good-paying American jobs that can’t be outsourced.

So this is, in the President’s mind, an approach that is validated by the facts and by the results.  And the President also believes that careful examination of those facts and those metrics points the way to the kinds of policies that should be implemented in the future to ensure that we continue making progress in solving this problem, and doing it in a way that has positive benefits for the economy.

Many Republicans previously doubted the idea that it was possible to reduce carbon pollution and protect the planet and grow the economy.  And that is a criticism that has now been gutted, because it just doesn’t withhold -- it just doesn’t stand up to any scrutiny.

So the President is pleased by his performance, and pleased by the results of the policy that he has implemented, and believes that a careful look at the facts points the way to the kinds of solutions that the American people should consider moving forward.

Q    So does he think that his Republican critics are going to be reading science?  Does he feel that current -- the current generation of scientists are not familiar with the facts?  Or is this more written kind of with future generations in mind?

MR. EARNEST:  I can’t speak to the reading habits of Republican members of Congress.  I’ll let you guys do a little digging on that one.  I think the President’s view is that these scientific journals are a venue where these arguments that are rooted in fact can be presented.  And everybody who is willing to consider them, we certainly welcome their careful consideration.

Q    Will there be more?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware of any that we have in the pipeline, but if there are additional ones we’ll make sure you get them.

Mark.

Q    Josh, when you say that the President himself is the drafting process of tomorrow’s speech, is that more of a role than he’s played in other major speeches that he’s given would you say?

MR. EARNEST:  I would say that the President’s participation in the writing of this speech is commensurate with his role in the writing of other major speeches, which is to say that the President is heavily involved.  The President gets important support from his team of speechwriters, so I certainly don’t want to downplay the difficult work that they do -- that the President finds it incredibly valuable.  But I think -- I feel confident in telling you that even they would say that the President is the person that’s writing the speech.

Q    Does he write by longhand when he drafts these out?

MR. EARNEST:  He typically does.  And this is -- some of you have seen the pictures, including a batch that Pete Souza, the presidential photographer, released at the end of last year -- that it’s not uncommon for the President to take a typewritten piece of paper and, in his very compact, left-handed script, to be including detailed edits on that piece of paper.

So that certainly is part of the process.  Part of the process also involves dictating certain passages to his speechwriters that they’ll play with and mold so that it can get into a typewritten form that he can then heavily and repeatedly edit.  And we’re deep into that process as of very early this morning, but I would anticipate that it will continue until very early tomorrow morning.

Q    Is tomorrow’s trip still the last out-of-town by the President?

MR. EARNEST:  At this point, the trip to Chicago will be President Obama’s final trip outside of Washington, D.C. as President of the United States.

Q    Does that mean they’ll be his last Air Force One flights?

MR. EARNEST:  I think it is likely to be his last Air Force One flight -- although it is obviously tradition for the former President to take one last flight aboard the presidential aircraft at the conclusion of the inauguration.

Q    Will he be leaving town after the inauguration?

MR. EARNEST:  That’s certainly what I would anticipate, yes.

Q    So not going to their D.C. residence, the new one?

MR. EARNEST:  The President and First Lady will be leaving town shortly after the inaugural ceremony.  But they will return, of course, to their rented house here in Washington, D.C.

Q    Day trip?

MR. EARNEST:  We’ll keep you posted.

Q    One last question.

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, I’m sorry, Mark.

Q    Is the White House -- did the White House decide to supply an aircraft to Vice President-elect Pence to bring him and his family today to Washington?

MR. EARNEST:  I can’t confirm any individual flights.  I know that there are a number of situations in which military aircraft have been used to help the incoming team move about the country as appropriate, but we can certainly check on whether a military aircraft was provided for the purpose that you just cited today.

Q    Thanks.

MR. EARNEST:  Lalit.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  On Chicago speech, would it include some aspects of his foreign policy, including the Asia Pacific region?

MR. EARNEST:  Lalit, I certainly wouldn’t rule out a discussion of some foreign policy topics.  I can’t detail which ones will be included.  But I would anticipate that the vast majority of his speech will be focused on many of the domestic policies and domestic considerations that the next President will have to carefully consider.

Q    And secondly, President Obama and Prime Minister Modi had established a hotline.  Will the President be passing on that hotline to President-elect Trump?

MR. EARNEST:  We’ll take a look.  I’d be surprised if that was something that was discontinued.  Typically those kinds of arrangements are intended to persist beyond just one presidential term, but we can confirm that for you.

Yes, sir.  You’ve had your hand up since the beginning.

Q    Thank you.  Does the interference by a foreign government -- or can the interference by a foreign government in our electoral process be constituted as an act of war?  First question.  And the follow-up to the Mitch question after that.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I know that there are many members of Congress -- or at least a couple members of Congress -- who have made clear that they believe that it does.  I don’t have a new label to apply today.  What I can tell you is that --

Q    Cyber war?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I can tell you that the administration takes this situation quite seriously.  And I think that is evident from the unanimous statement that was issued back in October containing the high-confident assessment of the United States intelligence community about Russia’s involvement in these nefarious activities.

I think the seriousness is evident in the public listing of the response from the United States government to these activities that included everything from kicking some Russian diplomats out of the country for activities that they’re engaged in that were inconsistent with their diplomatic status, and closing down a couple diplomatic facilities that were maintained by the Russians here in the United States.  It also included some significant sanctions against some entities in the Russian government and other entities that were involved in helping the Russian government.

So there are other elements of our response that I’m not in a position to discuss publicly --

Q    I understand, but would you consider it an act of war?

MR. EARNEST:  Again, I don’t have a new label to apply here today, but I think every careful examination of the evidence, of the statements from the intelligence community, and from the response that’s been mobilized from the United States government, this is a situation that we take quite seriously.

Q    And thank you for the letter from Mitch.  Those who have covered him for years understand his hypocrisy.  It knows no bounds.  But the question is, what are you all planning to do about it, or what does the government plan to do about it going forward?  I mean, making us aware of the facts seem inconsequential at this point.  Are there other steps to be taken?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think there are certainly members of the United States Senate that, at least for the last eight years, have taken quite seriously their responsibility to offer their advice and consent to presidential nominees.  Democrats and Republicans have both set a very high standard for Obama administration nominees that we’ve met, and the question is whether or not they have the courage and the fortitude and the back bone to adhere to --

Q    Are you calling them out?

MR. EARNEST:  -- to adhere to the same standard for President-elect Trump’s nominees.  I think that’s a simple question, and particularly for a President who took office vowing to drain the swamp, and particularly knowing the fear that the President-elect’s supporters strike in the heart of some Republican members of the United States Senate, maybe they will respond to the President-elect’s call to drain the swamp.

Q    Have you talked to Mitch?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have any new conversations to tell you about between President Obama and the Republican leader in the Senate, but certainly there are any number of conversations on a regular basis between this White House and the Congress.

I don’t know if there have been conversations about the process that is in place for President-elect Trump’s nominees, but I can tell you that over the last eight years that items that are detailed in this letter have been the subject of thousands of conversations between Capitol Hill and the White House, and the thought that those conversations are no longer going to occur because Republicans in the Senate are just going to fold I think does a grave disservice to the American people.

Q    Thank you for that sound bite.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.  You’re welcome.

Jared, I’ll give you the last one.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Two.  One, this McConnell question.  On many areas with the transition, you’ve meticulously avoided, in pursuit of a smooth and effective transition, avoided criticism of the incoming administration.  Why is this area different?  Why does the White House feel comfortable -- is it because it’s -- this is a Senate confirmation process?  What is the window through which you seem to be jumping very enthusiastically?

MR. EARNEST:  I feel quite strongly about this because this is certainly not the first time in the two and half years that I’ve been doing this job that we’ve have a detailed conversation in here about the process wielded by Republicans in the Senate for confirming executive branch nominees.  We’ve talked about this a lot.  And when you consider the case of people like Adam Szubin and Merrick Garland, and the passion with which you’ve heard me speak about their cases in the past, you shouldn’t be particularly surprised that I feel strongly about this particular situation.

I do want to make clear -- in case it’s lost on anybody -- I’m not telling anybody in the Senate how to vote.  But I am suggesting that the United States Senate -- Republicans in the Senate should merely adhere to the standard that’s been in place for the last eight years -- that we’ve met.  And I’m not the only person who thinks that they should adhere to the standard.  The author of the letter suggested that this standard should be in place regardless of which political party is in the majority.  I agree.

Q    Senate leaders and the President-elect’s team have said that they need this to happen quickly.  Why does the White House not find that argument compelling?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, let me cite a couple of reasons.
The first is, President Obama took office as the U.S. and global economy was hurtling off a cliff.  We didn’t cut any corners on ethics.  So I’d be interested to hear what sort of explanation Republicans in the Senate have for why they want to cut corners when it comes to ethics in considering the incoming administration’s nominees.  I’m not sure that too many people are going to find their explanation particularly persuasive, which may be why we haven’t heard one.

Q    One follow-up on Sarah’s question about energy independence.  This is obviously a promise that the President-elect made on the campaign trail.  It’s a very popular promise for members of either party to make when they’re running for elected office.  How far down the field -- forgive the football analogy -- how far down the field does the White House believe they’re leaving the ball for the next administration to either score or fumble, as they will?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, the Chiefs are in the playoffs, so I’m happy to talk about all the football analogies that you want.  (Laughter.)  Look, there’s no denying that this administration has racked up more than one first down when it comes to making progress in fighting climate change.  But I think even President Obama would acknowledge that we’re not even yet in field goal range in terms of solving this problem.

I could do this all day, but I won’t.  (Laughter.)  But I think it is an indication that we’ve made demonstrable progress, but there’s a lot more work to be done.  And so the incoming administration is going to face a question about whether or not they want to build on this momentum.  That certainly is a dynamic that we often see on the football field, that you get a couple of first downs going and you can string together a constructive drive.  But ultimately, the incoming administration is going to have to make a decision about whether they’re willing to continue this progress or if they want to fumble it away.  I couldn’t resist.

Q    Why is --

MR. EARNEST:  Let’s let Jared finish, and then I’ll do the last one.

Jared, anything else?

Q    I was just going to say, do you at this point -- based on the policies that they’ve laid out, which play does it look like they’re calling?

MR. EARNEST:  I wouldn’t predict at this point how they will take on this responsibility, but it is a significant one and it won’t just be people in the United States who are watching how they handle it.

Q    -- how Iran ended up with natural uranium as part of the JCPOA?

MR. EARNEST:  I know that there are some public reports about this.  What I can tell you is that, pursuant to the international agreement to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon, Iran had to agree to the most intrusive set of inspections and monitoring that’s imposed on any country’s nuclear program.  And so any sort of uranium that is held by the Iranian government will be subject to very strict limits and very strict monitoring for how that material is handled.  All of that will be done consistent with the agreement that does prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon and that does prevent Iran from shortening the amount of time that it would take for them to develop a nuclear weapon.

Q    Without getting too much into yellow cake versus other types of uranium we’re talking about here, the transfer of the uranium from Russia to Iran -- that was part of the deal, is that your understanding?

MR. EARNEST:  I’d refer you to the IAEA on this.  What I can tell you is that these kinds of arrangements are carefully negotiated among the parties and, as I mentioned earlier, will be subject to the careful monitoring and inspections that are included in the deal to ensure that Iran is living up to the commitments that they have made.

Thanks, everybody, we’ll see you on the plane tomorrow, at least some of you.

Q    Are you going to brief tomorrow or just gaggle on the plane?

MR. EARNEST:  We’ll just gaggle on the plane tomorrow.

Thanks, everybody.  Enjoy the rest of your day.

END
2:00 P.M. EST
12:43 P.M. EST
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Nice to see you all.  I do not have any comments at the top so we can go straight to questions.  Mr. Freking, would you like to go first?

Q    Sure.  Thank you, Josh.  So a Russian deputy foreign minister says Russia is close to reaching a deal with the U.S. on a ceasefire in Aleppo.  Is the White House becoming more hopeful that an agreement can be reached?

MR. EARNEST:  Kevin, our approach to the situation from the beginning has been to listen carefully to what the Russians say, but scrutinize their actions.  So, obviously, that statement is an indication that something positive could happen, but we’re going to have to wait and see whether those statements are reflected on the ground.

Obviously, Secretary Kerry has been working tenaciously almost around the clock with the Russians and other countries in the region to try to reduce the violence in Aleppo so that humanitarian assistance can reach those communities that so desperately need it.  And if that occurs, we obviously would welcome that development.  And if that occurs, it won’t be some sort of accident or coincidence or serendipity; it will be the product and result of skilled, principled, tough, tenacious diplomacy.  And much of the credit will go the Secretary Kerry.  But we’ll see what happens.

Q    Do you have any sense of a timeline as far as how long these discussions, these negotiations are expected to continue before there is some sort of either agreement or non-agreement?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, as we’ve said before, there’s no military solution to this problem.  We can certainly use our military -- and we have -- to go after ISIL, to take back territory that they’d previously controlled and to take their leaders off the battlefield.

But when it comes to resolving the underlying political instability that has led to the chaos, that’s going to require a diplomatic solution.  And this diplomacy will continue until we can start seeing the political results on the ground that we would like to see, and that will include and be characterized by a reduction in violence and enough stability in the security situation that humanitarian assistance can consistently flow to needed areas.

Q    I wanted to ask about the nomination of Scott Pruitt to run the EPA.  And I know you’re not talking about nominations or any individuals, but in this case, would his confirmation really be game, set, match for the U.S. and other countries meeting their commitments under the Paris agreement?  Or do you still view this agreement as setting an irrevocable trajectory toward the U.S. and other countries moving to clean energy?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, Kevin, I think this is a perfectly legitimate question.  The President has, himself, observed that it’s one thing to make grand pronouncements on the campaign trail, but once you enter the Oval Office and you’re responsible for managing the affairs of the United States and being leader of the free world, reality has a way of intruding.

We’ll see to what extent reality intrudes on some of the rhetoric that was used by the President-elect in the area of climate change.  For example, he at one point tweeted that climate change was a manufactured hoax by the Chinese government. So that obviously is not substantiated by any sort of facts or evidence or science.

But as I’ve done in the context of other Cabinet nominees, it does seem appropriate to lay out some benchmarks and guidelines that illustrate the progress that we have made as a country and as a planet, in this case, based on the strategy that President Obama has pursued.  And it will be important for the American people and for people in this room to compare the plans that are put forward by the next administration with the plans and results that were produced under President Obama’s leadership.

This one I think I can do in relatively concise fashion.  I think there are four areas that I would recommend.

The first is fuel economy.  President Obama, when he first took office, had to make a difficult, politically unpopular decision to rescue the American auto industry, and that included working with the industry to put in place regulations that would increase fuel efficiency standards.  In the eight years that President Obama has been in office, the average fuel economy for passenger cars and trucks has increased from about 21 miles per gallon to more than 25 miles per gallon.  That’s a 20 percent increase in fuel efficiency.  That’s good news.  There certainly is more that we would like to see moving forward, now that we’ve got some built-up momentum.  We’ll see if it continues under the next administration.

The thing that I would point out -- and I think this is a relevant fact -- that increase in fuel efficiency was accompanied by record production by the American auto industry and record sales in the United States in 2015.  So there was a sense that by increasing regulations and raising fuel efficiency standards -- this was a criticism of Republicans -- that the President was going to hamstring the American auto industry.  The opposite has occurred.  As we have seen an increase in fuel economy, we’ve seen record growth in the American auto industry.  And that will be a standard that the next administration should be judged by because that is progress that was made based on a specific strategy that President Obama laid out.

The second, it’s important to understand what kind of progress the renewable energy industry has made in the United States.  Since 2008, the amount of energy produced by the wind has tripled while the cost of producing that energy using the wind has declined by 40 percent.  The numbers as it relates to solar energy is even more dramatic.  Solar generation has increased thirtyfold -- three zero -- thirtyfold since 2008 while the cost per unit of producing energy through solar means has reduced -- has fallen 60 percent.

And that has led to a lot of economic benefits for the American people.  The renewable energy industry in the United States employs 2.5 million people.  And part of that renewable energy industry benefits from the international market that is created by countries around the world agreeing to reduce their carbon footprint.  It means they have to consider adding wind and solar to their energy production mix, and the United States is poised to be a leader in that industry.  And it is undermined, in part, by a unilateral withdrawal of the United States from that international agreement.

The third thing, CO2 emissions.  Carbon dioxide emissions from energy consumption has fallen by more than 500 million metric tons per year from 2008 to 2015.  That’s a pretty significant reduction, and that reduction occurred even as our economy grew.  There was a suggestion that we have to sacrifice economic growth in order to see the reduction in emissions that we had targeted, and, of course, the opposite has been true.  Over about that same period of time, our businesses have created 15.6 million jobs over the last 81 months, and we continue to see an unemployment rate that is less than half where it was at the peak of the Great Recession.

The last statistic, and I think this is an important one, too, and has profound consequences for our national security, and that is the degree to which we've been able to reduce our country’s reliance on foreign oil.  In 2008, the United States of America was importing a little more than 11 million barrels of oil per day.  That number has been cut in half -- more than in half, actually -- to 4.9 million barrels per day.

Some of that is because of the support that this administration has shown to domestic producers of oil and gas;  some of it is because of the investments and commitment that we've made to fuel efficiency; and some of it is the investment that we've made in renewable energy that give us alternative methods of generating electricity and powering our economy.

That's a strategy that's worked, and it has reduced our reliance on foreign oil in a way that has positive consequences for our national security.

So I know that was a little long, but again, these are benchmarks that are relevant to illustrating the progress we've made based on the strategy that President Obama has pursued.  And given the fact that the President-elect has promised to pursue a different strategy, it's worth comparing whether or not his strategy will yield results that are as good as what we've been doing.

Thank you for the opportunity, Kevin.

Tim.  Nice to see you.

Q    Nice to see you.  Along those lines, are you suggesting that some of these advances -- like the sort of conversion to natural gas and turning away from coal -- to some extent that these are tamper-proof by the next few years, by the next administration?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, there clearly are market forces that are involved here.  There are market forces that you're seeing other countries around the world -- in part because of the important international climate diplomacy that was led by the United States under President Obama’s leadership -- has been considering a more diverse array of energy generation sources.  And the United States is poised to benefit from that.

The best example I have of this is actually with regard to China.  China made a significant commitment to cap their emissions, and part of that will be decommissioning or putting out of business some of their coal-fired power plants and investing in and building nuclear power plants.  Those nuclear power plants are going to be, at least in part, built by American companies.  That's American economic growth and American jobs that are the result of China making an important, self-interested decision to reduce their emissions and consider an alternative form of energy -- in this case, nuclear energy.  And Westinghouse stands to benefit from that rather significantly -- a great American company.

So there are significant market forces that do counter the argument that's not rooted in science that's being made by the other side.

Q    And of the four points, one thing you didn’t mention is that sort of the President pushing the American people to pressure on this.  Starting from the 2012 inauguration speech, and then you had a few years later the Keystone protests, and then environmental lawyers basically being the final straw that stopped Shell from drilling in the Arctic, the finding that they found that pressured Shell.  So is there a feeling in the White House that that's going to continue, that this swell of pressure, and also make these things more tamper-proof?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, it's also -- in addition to market forces that are already at work here that are moving our economy and our country and our planet in a more healthy direction, that's not a historical mistake either.  It has required presidential leadership by President Obama.  It has also required the commitment and action of people all across the country who want to make sure that our planet is protected for future generations.

There's people in both parties; plenty of social conservatives are quite interested in making sure that we're good stewards of God’s creation.  And it turns out there’s a way to be good stewards of God’s creation even as we look for smart ways to grow our economy.  And that's exactly the strategy that President Obama has pursued.

Q    Just two more on this.  Do you know how the President feels personally, having since well before the first -- when he was a senator, this was a big issue for him, and he was the first sitting President to go to the Arctic -- how does he feel that the Clean Power Plan and the Paris agreement could be vulnerable?

MR. EARNEST:  The President talked about this at some length in the context of the election.  And the President is quite proud of the legacy that he’s established in focusing not just America’s attention but the world’s attention on taking action to fight climate change.  And the historic agreement in Paris is certainly a good, tangible example of what the world can accomplish when the United States is committed to playing a leading, principled role in solving problems.

But ultimately, it will be up to the next President to decide.  And there’s no denying that that progress is at risk because we’ve got a President-elect who has identified different priorities and has even been critical of some of this progress.  And that’s unfortunate, but elections have consequences.

Q    And last one -- what are the chances that the President will be active in climate after January 20th?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, as you’ve heard the President say a number of times now, I think immediately after leaving office, the President is looking forward to taking some time off and catching up on some sleep, as he regularly tells Mark Knoller; taking his wife on vacation, and maybe even putting pen to paper and writing a book.

So I wouldn’t expect aggressive public advocacy on January 21st, but is this an issue that the President cares about?  It absolutely is.  And it’s not hard to imagine President Obama finding an appropriate way, as a former President of the United States, continuing to encourage people to advocate for building on the momentum that we’ve already achieved under the President’s leadership in fighting climate change, and doing it in a way that ends up being good for the U.S. economy.

Dave.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  The Senate is voting right now on the NDAA, which, of course, forbids the administration from closing Guantanamo.  Assuming that it passes, is that the last word on the President’s efforts to close Gitmo?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Dave, I would expect the administration to continue to pursue the strategy that we’ve been pursuing for almost eight years now, which is being engaged in an effort to reduce the prison at -- the population of the prison at Guantanamo Bay even as we do so in a way that we believe is good for our national security.

Continuing to operate the prison at Guantanamo Bay only gives terrorist organizations a recruiting tool.  And what the President and his team have structured is a process for six different national security agencies to come together to review the individual case files of the prisoners, determine which of those detainees can be transferred to other countries and under what conditions.  And once those transfers are approved, the State Department has to go to work in negotiating with other countries to ask them to accept these detainees and to apply these security restrictions.

And ultimately that strategy has worked to reduce the prison population by more than 175 since President Obama took office, and to make the American people safer.  But the President still believes that the prison should be closed.  Doing so would make our country safer and would save taxpayers a significant sum of money.  But there are obstacles to doing that that have been erected by Congress that remain in place.

Q    Do you have any updates on the 58 or so detainees who are still there?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have any updates at this point.  But as we make transfers, we always announce those transfers publicly and we make public the name and destination of the detainee that’s been moved.

Q    Formally closing Gitmo is something the President has been trying to since day one.

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah, almost literally.

Q    Why wasn’t he able to make the case?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I think that he and others, including myself, have repeatedly made the case that it's a case that Democrats and Republicans alike who are national security experts, have served in our military, have worked in the intelligence community -- they don’t just understand the argument that we’re making, they agree with it.  The politics of this are potent, and Congress, in response to those politics, has made this a very difficult task.

Ron.

Q    Just to follow up on the questions about appointments and policy changes that they seem to be signaling.  Is it fair to say that -- on advocacy by the President -- you seem to suggest that we're not going to hear anything from the President in terms of advocacy or pushing back before January 20th.  Is that fair?

MR. EARNEST:  In terms of --

Q    The President reacting to what appears to be changes in the direction the country is going to go on major policy issues, like climate change, the Affordable Care Act, education, other areas where there have been appointments that seem to suggest -- that clearly suggest that there's going to be a different direction than what he would like.

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I think on November 9th we knew that the country was going to start moving in a different direction, even before any of those personnel appointments were made.  So, look, I recognize why they come up in a setting like this, where you guys are interested in a reaction to those nominees, so I'm not suggesting that's that an inappropriate line of questioning, but it's certainly not a new one.

Q    But I guess what I'm trying to understand is, is there a line?  The President, in Lima, said something about how, if questions are raised about our core values and ideals, is I think the way he phrased it, that he would respond.  And I think he was talking about in the post-January 20th period.

MR. EARNEST:  That's right -- as a former President.

Q    Right.  So it seemed like there was no line before that could be crossed before January 20th that would motivate the President to engage in some kind of discussion about these issues, because he is so committed to the idea of a smooth transition.  But I guess the question -- and I guess I've asked it before -- is that desire for a smooth transition -- is there anything that the President could foresee happening where he would want to speak out more forcefully about the direction that the new administration is moving in?

MR. EARNEST:  I think particularly since November 8th and the morning of November 9th, I think we've gotten out of the business of predicting or foreseeing what may or may not happen based on the outcome of the election.  What our approach has been and will continue to be is to prioritize the smooth, effective transfer of power.  And that will require the President and a number of other officials in the U.S. government setting aside their own personal political views and putting the interest of the country, first.

And that's a difficult thing, particularly when you consider the stakes of the election, and particularly when you consider how invested senior officials in the Obama administration have been in our success.  But it's what the Constitution requires. It's what the American people have said is their preference based on the election.  And we're going to fulfil the institutional responsibility of the executive branch to give the next President the best possible opportunity to get off to a running start.

Q    But is there anything maybe you can say about any conversations that the President and the President-elect had and the level of engagement, advocacy, without talking about the substance of it?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have anything new on this.  They've engaged in some consultations, but --

Q    You can understand the questions.

MR. EARNEST:  Sure.

Q    Clearly -- I mean, I think we all understand the idea of a smooth transition, but clearly the country is going in a different direction that threatens so much of what the President and the team have done over the past eight years.  That seems just obviously clear to most observers.

MR. EARNEST:  It was clear before the election.

Q    Right.

MR. EARNEST:  And the President made a forceful case before the election and the President's candidate didn’t win.

Q    Right.  And it would seem very difficult to just not -- stand idly by.  But obviously you're doing some advocacy by listing all these accomplishments that you see in the area of the environment.

MR. EARNEST:  Sure.

Q    I would just think it's very difficult for the President to watch this happen, to watch what seems to be his legacy unraveling and the things he cared about so passionately.

MR. EARNEST:  I think you might have slightly overstated it there.  But, look --

Q    I guess that's the argument.  Am I overstating it?  Or is he so convinced, as he's put it, that the realities of the office and the realities of the world are going to be such a difficult inertia to push back at that much of what he has done will stay in place?

MR. EARNEST:  We'll see.  I mean, that really is the answer.  We had an opportunity to have this argument, and the President made it forcefully, and I think a lot of people were persuaded by the argument.  The fact is, the candidate that he supported actually got more votes than the next President.  So I think a lot of people were persuaded -- most people were persuaded by it.

But that’s not the way that our system is structured.  We’re following the rules of the Electoral College.  Those are the rules we signed up for.  Many analysts actually expected that the rules of the Electoral College would actually give Democrats a built-in advantage.  Didn’t turn out that way.  And the time for these kinds of debates, at least on the part of those of us who serve in the executive branch, has passed, because we’ve got a more important responsibility, and that is doing the will of the American people and ensuring a smooth and effective transition to the next administration, because that’s what’s in the best interests of the country.

Q    But is he having any conversations with Mrs. Clinton while she’s in town?

MR. EARNEST:  None that I can report and none that I’m aware of, but I can’t rule it out.

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  I want to ask you about the President’s thoughts about the DREAMers.  Is there anything that he can do to protect their future vis-à-vis commutations or pardons?  There’s been some talk that that’s something that he would strongly consider?  And as sort of a secondary question on the same topic, is it fair to say that the President is strongly considering perhaps pardons or commutations for other high-profile individuals -- Manning, Bergdahl, Snowden, and others?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have a whole lot to say about the clemency process.  The President has talked about this at some length earlier this year.

A couple things I can say.  The first is, the President cannot use his clemency authority to legalize the immigration status of anybody, and that is why we pursued the executive actions that we did, and is why the President was such a forceful advocate for legislation that would correct some of the injustices and implement so many of the reforms that would improve our immigration system in a way that would enhance our national security, improve our country’s fiscal situation, and obviously ensure that we’re treating people fairly and giving America the benefit, the upside of immigrants who come to this country and create jobs, and serve in our military, and live in our communities, make the United States the great country that it is.

With regard to other clemency measures the President may be considering, and what the President has said previously is, he does not expect to essentially ram through any pardons at the last minute.  There’s an established process and the President believes that’s a process that’s worth following.

Q    Let me just drill down a little bit on that.  Given his appreciation, if you will, for history and the understanding of how his reputation would certainly be impacted greatly depending on who might receive clemency, be that -- if you want to look back Clinton and Mark Rich, if you look back at Ford and Nixon -- how much of that do you think is a consideration, do you think, for the President as he considers clemency for some of these higher-profile people?

MR. EARNEST:  I guess you’d have to talk to him about sort of to what extent history factors into his decision.  What I know factors into his decision is the fact that we have worked very hard, particularly in the last couple of years, to stand up and expand the capacity of an existing process at the Department of Justice to consider clemency petitions that have been filed.  And that has resulted in the President being able to offer clemency in the form of commuting sentences of more than a thousand people now.  That is more than the past 11 Presidents combined.  And that is an effort on the part of the President to use his executive authority to reform some aspects of the criminal justice system that don’t seem particularly just.

And the President would have preferred a more sweeping solution to that problem that only legislation could bring about, but that is not something that Congress was able to succeed in passing, despite the fact that there were high-profile Democrats and Republicans who supported that principle and did even support some pieces of legislation.  But it is another criminal justice reform -- common-sense criminal justice reform that would be good for our economy -- that's another victim of Republican dysfunction in Congress.  And, unfortunately, there are numerous victims, and that’s one of them.

Q    You mentioned solar a bit earlier.  How much of the growth of the use of solar power is subsidized by the federal government?

MR. EARNEST:  We can get you the metrics here, but the performance of the loan program at the Department of Energy was remarkably successful.  And I think the growth of the solar industry overall -- the fact that solar generation in this country has increased 30 times -- 3-0 -- since 2008 I think is an indication that that is an industry that’s taken off.  And that is an industry that is now not just competing in the United States for business, but they’re competing around the world.  And that’s a good thing for our economy.

Q    Lastly, yesterday, it was interesting -- you said “The kinds of people President-elect Trump has chosen to appear have in many cases different priorities, different styles and, in some cases, starkly different bank accounts.”  I thought that was a pretty interesting statement by you.  Obviously, talking today --

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not the first person to make that observation.

Q    Perhaps not.  You’ve heard the former Ford CEO is someone that is also having a conversation perhaps with the President-elect.  Does bank account matter?  Or was that just sort of an off-the-cuff comment?  How do you square that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, as I mentioned yesterday, I was just trying to get you guys to laugh.  And again, if the joke requires explanation, it probably was not particularly successful.  (Laughter.)

Q    Last one I have for you -- there was a very interesting person in the room.  What have you been able to draw from your friendship with the former press secretary, who happens to be in the back of the room today, and how have things changed?
MR. EARNEST:  If I seem a little nervous today it’s because one of my predecessors is actually in the room today.  Look, Dana did this job for President Bush for the last couple of years of his of his presidency, look, and she was widely acclaimed by people on both sides of the aisle for her integrity, her seriousness of purpose in doing this job.  And she won a lot of admiration from people in Obama world by the way that she handled herself in the context of that transition in 2008 and 2009.

That surely must have been a very difficult thing to do, given the degree to which President Obama was promising to change many of the policies that President Bush had sought to implement. But she did a noble and, in some ways, uniquely American thing, which is that she set aside her own political views and actually was committed to ensuring that President Obama’s press staff could understand how the White House works and could get off to the best possible start.

And there is a tough learning curve when you walk through that door for the first time in understanding exactly what the expectations of the press corps are, and understanding how to operate all the levers of government in order to get the information that we need in order to come out here and make the President’s case.  But she gave us -- she was certainly more than an honest broker.  She was somebody who was determined to try to help us understand exactly what the job required and what resources were available to us to do that job as well as we possibly could.  And so that’s why a lot of us have enduring respect for Dana and the way that she did her job.  And it’s been fun having her around here today.

Chris, go ahead.

Q    I want to get your comment on a specific case.  The ACLU is leading LGBT groups in calling for a clemency for Chelsea Manning, who is in the seventh year of a 35-year sentence for leaking classified information, has served in jail time longer than anyone else for that offense.  Will the President commute the sentence for Chelsea Manning?

MR. EARNEST:  Chris, I’m not going to discuss individual cases.  There is a process that’s been established at the Department of Justice.  For the way that those applications -- whether or not those applications have been filed and how they’re being processed is a question you should direct to them.

Q    Well, Manning is a transgender serving in a men’s prison, was initially denied transition-related care before the Army agreed to it, and has a history of suicide attempts at the prison.  Would those be factors the President would weigh in deciding whether to grant clemency in this case?

MR. EARNEST:  At this point, I wouldn’t speculate on what factors the President may consider.  So there’s a well-established process for considering these clemency petitions, and I’d refer you to the Department of Justice for an update on why that may stand.

Q    And the President has, of course, commuted a lot of sentences for a lot of individuals.  Would there be some point at which they would stop?  Or do you expect that to continue to happen right until January 20th?

MR. EARNEST:  I would anticipate that the process will continue to run until the end.  But this is a process that cannot be done overnight, that these kinds of applications have to be filed well in advance, and there's a lot of background work that has to be done before decisions on individual cases can be rendered.  So I would not envision a rush to the exits here, but I would anticipate that the process will continue until the last day.

Jessica.

Q    A question on trade.  The WTO makes a decision on Monday about whether China should be granted Market Economy Status.  I wanted to see what the White House position on that is and what your concerns are for the ramifications for U.S. companies.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, this is a determination that's actually made by the Department of Commerce.  And so we'll let the analysists at the Department of Commerce take a close look at the Chinese economy and come to a decision based on the merits.

Margaret.

Q    Josh, real quick, fine point.  The NDAA -- the President will sign it as written?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have a position on that to disclose at this point, but why don’t we consult with our staff and we'll get back to you on that.

Q    On the CR, apparently Nancy Pelosi just said she's going to oppose it.  You got the Congressional Ball here today.  Are you going to be sending everyone home to finish their work?

MR. EARNEST:  (Laughter.)  Maybe they'll negotiate in their gowns and tuxedos.  That would make for quite a picture.

Q    Well, some arm-twisting, perhaps.

Q    No coverage.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  Well, maybe we should change it here for the end, huh?

Q    Hear, hear.

Q    Are you confident there won't be a government shutdown?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, as I told Kevin, when it comes to predicting the behavior of Republican politicians in Washington, I'm not going to do that.

Q    Nancy Pelosi says she opposes it.

MR. EARNEST:  Right.  But ultimately we've got Republicans in charge of the House, Republicans in charge of the Senate, and if they want to get any bill passed and signed into law, they're going to have to work with Democrats to get it done, in part because there are recalcitrant Republicans in the House, many of whom appear opposed to any kind of CR, so it's possible they may need many Democratic votes to pass it.  When you consider the well-chronicled and widely discussed rules in the Senate, it's likely that Democratic votes will be needed to advance the legislation.  And, of course, the bill has to be signed into law by a Democratic President.

So Republicans are in charge of those two branches of Congress.  Congress has one basic responsibility -- well, they've got many basic responsibilities -- but among the more important basic responsibilities is passing a budget for the U.S. government and making sure that the government can function.  And it sure would be a shame to shut the whole thing done just a couple of weeks before Christmas.

Q    And on Syria, you said you're not -- you're hopeful, but you don’t know about a deal yet.  Riyad Hijab, who's a Syrian prime minister who defected and is now the political leader of the opposition that the U.S. and (inaudible) recognize -- had some blistering criticism that I want you to be able to respond to.  He told the Wall Street Journal in an interview that "history will never forgive Obama for what he has done to the Syrian people.  He has raised their expectations, and then he gave Bashar al-Assad the green light," talking about strengthening Iran's position in Syria, saying that Assad must go and not doing anything to oppose him.  How do you respond to that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, given the tragedy that has befallen his country, it's not surprising to me that he's using some rather pointed rhetoric to make his argument.  But ultimately, the President of the United States has one overriding responsibility, and that's to look out for the interests and safety of the American people.  And that's what President Obama has prioritized over everything else.  We certainly have been deeply concerned about the plight of the Syrian people, and that's why the United States has devoted significant time and attention and resources to trying to bring that violence to an end.

The President and the United States have played the leading role in the international community to reach the kind of negotiating, diplomatic solution that will be required to bring that violence to an end.  And there is just no military solution that would work.  And I think my evidence for that is that there are some people who hint that the President should ramp up military operations, but there's no real, coherent description of a military solution that anybody has really described.  And I certainly don’t mean that as a criticism of the gentleman that you cited; I mean that as an illustration of just how complex the situation is.  And the President, at every turn, has put the interest of the United States first, and that's the responsibility of the Commander-in-Chief.

Q    But to his point on history not forgiving the President, is the President certain that history will see his side of things and his view of this?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, I think if we know anything about history, it's that historians tend to disagree about history, and I think this may be an area where historians do end up quibbling just a little bit.

But, again, I think the one thing that historians on both sides will acknowledge is the military solution that many people seem to wish for, including people with the best of intentions, simply does not exist.  It has not been presented for any sort of public consideration.

And diplomacy can be hard, it can be frustrating, it can take far longer than we would like.  And I think there's probably no better illustration of diplomacy fitting that criteria that I just laid out then with regard to the situation in Syria.  It has been hard, it's been frustrating, and it's taken far longer than we would like.  But that's the only solution.  That is the only way we can bring this violence to an end.  It's the only way we can address the underlying chaos in Syria.  And it's the only way we can expedite the provision of badly needed humanitarian assistance.  And the United States has done more than anybody else to try to find that diplomatic solution, but we haven’t found it yet.

Kenneth.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  Leading up to the election, the President was quite vocal about President-elect Donald Trump's use of Twitter and how he communicated on Twitter.  And you've said that the President -- it's his responsibility to look out for the interest of American people, look out for the American people and business.  So is this White House and the President concerned about the President-elect targeting certain businesses, i.e. Boeing, or individuals, American citizens on Twitter, i.e. union leader of Carrier factory jobs that was in the news last week.  Any concern?  Any thoughts?  Obviously, I'm sure you heard about the union leader being targeted this morning and the criticism there.

MR. EARNEST:  I've got lots of thoughts, and as tempting as it is, I'm going to refer questions about the Twitter handle of the President-elect to the President-elect's team.

Q    Josh, also, back to DREAMers -- you were asked about it yesterday and again today -- but is there a message for those who came out of the shadows at the urging of this administration?  Is there a message to those folks who are now nervous about what's going to happen after January 20th?  I feel like the White House hasn’t put out that message or spoken directly to those DREAMers who feel that the information that they've given to the government and coming out of the shadows is not in jeopardy.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kenneth, I think there are a couple things about this.  The first is that the White House has been in close touch with a number of advocacy organizations, even in the aftermath of the election, to talk to them about the facts of immigration policy and to try to offer some reassurance.  Certainly, the President and his transition team have gone to great lengths to describe and explain the policy that we have pursued to the incoming administration, so that when they begin the process of making some decisions about what our immigration policy should like, they can have the benefit of understanding exactly what our approach has been and what the benefits of that approach are.

We're also continuing to encourage Congress to take action. Ultimately, the kind of executive action that President Obama has pursued was largely pursued because of congressional inaction.  We would much have preferred Democrats and Republicans in the Congress to capitalize on the obvious bipartisan ground that exists to implement common-sense immigration reform that would strengthen our economy, that would reduce the deficit, that would strengthen our borders, and ensure that we were treating fairly the hundreds of thousands of people in this country that are American in every way but their papers.

And these are hundreds of thousands of people who were brought to the United States as children and have grown up in America, enmeshed in our communities, going to our schools, attending our churches, serving in our military.

So the President believes that we certainly are a nation of laws, a nation of laws that should be enforced, but we're also a nation of immigrants, and our policy should reflect that as well.

Q    And finally, when the President told CNN that the strength of ISIL, or ISIS, “wasn’t on his intelligence radar,” was he faulting the intelligence that he was getting or the failure of the intelligence?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’m glad you asked.  I know that some have perceived it that way, but the fact is, back in September of 2014, the Director of the Office of National Intelligence, Jim Clapper, told David Ignatius, a writer for the Washington Post “in this case we underestimated ISIL, and overestimated the fighting capability of the Iraqi army.”  He continued, “I didn’t see the collapse of the Iraqi security force in the North coming.  I didn’t see that.”

So the President’s comments to Fareed Zakaria for that documentary are consistent with the comments that you heard from the Director of National Intelligence more than two years ago about how difficult it would have been to accurately predict the effectiveness of ISIL on the battlefield and the ineffectiveness of an Iraqi security force that essentially had been hollowed out by the corruption and failed leadership of Prime Minister Maliki.

Those are the facts the President discussed in that interview, not for the first time.

Mark.

Q    Josh, I have sort of a straightforward question.  I know we had this week at MacDill Air Force Base a speech framing the President’s record on counterterrorism, lessons learned, et cetera.  Does he envision a sort of more expansive farewell speech talking about lessons learned and what his legacy ought to be?

MR. EARNEST:  There certainly is a possibility of that, so stay tuned.

Q    After the holidays, maybe?

MR. EARNEST:  Not before the holidays.

Q    Not before the holidays, okay.  Well, that's comforting.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay, good.

Michelle.

Q    We’ve had a lot to say so far about the Pruitt appointment, and you made those environmental points.  But we’ve also seen Donald Trump meeting with Al Gore, most recently Leonardo DiCaprio, and apparently he’s had these long wonderful conversations with President Obama.  So what would you say your confidence level is that the environment will be a priority?  How would you sort of describe your view of, I don’t know, I guess what these signals mean?

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah.  Well, clearly the signals are mixed.  I would assume that the kinds of conversations that the President-elect had with the Nobel prize-winning former Vice President were different than the kinds of conversations he had with the attorney general of Oklahoma who has been working hand-in-glove with the energy industry to call into question the science of climate change and to fight in a court of law, tooth and nail, against the kind of common-sense rules that we’ve put forward that have strengthened our economy and improved the health of our planet.

But how all of that comes out in the wash, so to speak, I think is something we’ll all be watching over the next couple of years.  But hopefully the metrics that I laid out earlier can be useful to all of you as you measure the results of the policy that the next administration chooses to pursue.

Q    Okay.  And Vice President Biden today, talking about the campaigns, called them ugly, coarse, dispiriting, a battle of personalities not of ideas, and he said that he was embarrassed by it.  What does the administration think of those comments?  And do you agree with them?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think you heard me say on many occasions, you certainly heard the President say on a number of occasions how concerned and even disturbed at various points many Americans were by the rhetoric and tone of the election.  There was a willingness to engage in some rather cynical tactics that was dispiriting.

But the election is over, the American people have decided.  They cast more votes for Hillary Clinton but they elected Donald Trump President of the United States.  And the time for that debate has ended, and the institutional responsibilities of the executive branch require all of us, including the President setting aside his political preferences and focusing on the responsibility that he has to ensure a smooth and effective transition to the incoming President.

Q    Do you think the President agrees with Vice President Biden that this was embarrassing?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, there are plenty of times where I think all Americans, certainly a large number of Americans, were disturbed by what they saw.  But our opportunity to have that debate has -- well, first of all, there was ample opportunity to have that debate, and I don’t think there was any mystery in the minds of too many voters about who they were voting for, but they decided.

Q    Okay.  And we keep hearing more calls for briefings by -- members of Congress want to be briefed on that Russian intelligence on hacking.  So what is the status of that?

MR. EARNEST:  I can tell you that those kinds of briefings and the provision of that information continues on the part of the intelligence community to members of Congress who seek it out.  They obviously have a direct responsibility to those congressional committees that are charged with providing oversight over certain elements of the executive branch, but there are other members of Congress who are interested in this issue who have also received briefings and information from the administration.

We’re going to continue to cooperate with Congress, and there is some classified elements of this analysis that can be shared with some of those members.  But if there are additional intelligence conclusions that can be released, I wouldn’t rule out future releases -- public releases of information about this matter either.

Toluse.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Yesterday, the Russian government completed the sale of a stake of its largest oil producer, Rosneft, to Qatar and to Glencore.  And there are some who are watching this deal, saying that this $11 billion deal is a way that Putin has been able to get around sanctions.  Do you believe that this sale violated the sanctions (inaudible)?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the thing that I -- there’s not much that I can say about an individual financial transaction, even one as large and as significant as this one.  The thing I can confirm for you is that the experts at the Department of Treasury that are responsible for constructing and enforcing the sanctions regime will carefully look at a transaction like this.  They’ll look at the terms of the deal and evaluate what impact sanctions would have on it.  But how all that shakes out is something that you should ask the Treasury Department about.

Q    And a question on Yemen.  Human Rights Watch just put out a report saying that a couple of the airstrikes in Yemen in September and October by the Saudi-led coalition killed dozens of civilians, and the weapons that were used were American weapons that were given to the Saudi-led coalition after the conflict started.  And the report, it says that these new findings put the U.S. at risk of complicity and unlawful attacks.  Do you have a reaction to that report?

MR. EARNEST:  Toluse, I’d say something similar to what we said before, because we’ve heard reports like this in the past. And the U.S. review of assistance to the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen is ongoing, and the United States continues to have grave concerns about coalition strikes that have resulted in civilian casualties.

Even as the United States assists Saudi Arabia regarding the defense of its territorial integrity, we will continue to press the Saudi-led coalition to remediate the flaws in its targeting cycle and take other immediate steps to mitigate against future civilian casualties.  We’ve spoken out about our concerns in the past, and we’ll continue to do so moving forward, even as we review the kind of assistance that we provide to the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen.

Q    And one more on life expectancy in the U.S.  There was a report that said that for the first time since 1993, life expectancy has declined, or declined in 2015.  I know you usually talk about all the ways that the economy and the U.S. political system has improved since 2008.  What’s your reaction to the fact that life expectancy seems to have gone down at least slightly from last year?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t seen that analysis, but why don’t we take a look and see if we can get somebody to follow up with you.

Q    And sorry, one more.

MR. EARNEST:  That’s okay.  I didn’t really answer that one, so -- (laughter) --

Q    Donald Trump is going to Louisiana to stump for the Senate candidate down there.  There’s going to be a Senate race; it concludes on Saturday.  There has been some concern that Democrats don’t seem to be -- at least national Democrats don’t seem to be rallying behind the candidate down there.  Is the President aware of this race?  Is he involved in any way?  Does he have any reaction to how national Democrats aren’t engaging in that race?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, Louisiana has a peculiar election system that results in these kinds of runoffs occurring quite frequently.  And it’s a process that results in a pretty important election, like the one that they’re expecting to hold here this coming weekend, taking place just a few weeks after a national election that captured everybody’s attention.

So this is not the first time that there’s been a discussion about whether one national party or the other is giving short shrifts to the outcome of a runoff in Louisiana.  I’ll admit that I’ve been a little busy here lately and I haven’t been following the contours of the race, but, look -- so I don’t know to what extent President Obama has weighed in or supported a candidate.  I know that there are some Democrats across the country that have been supportive of the candidate down there, but I can’t speak to anything that the President has done.

Gardiner.

Q    Just quickly, Josh, when is the President going to sign the 21st Century Cures Act in a ceremony?  Can you give us any hints about that?

MR. EARNEST:  I can’t at this point.  I don’t know that we’ve actually even received the bill at this point.  Sometimes it takes a little while to work its way through the bureaucracy of Congress and arrive on the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue.  But the President does intend to sign the bill.  He was obviously pleased to see a rare moment -- a rare bipartisan display that resulted in the passage of this bill that will increase funding for those fighting opioid addiction and increase funding for the cancer moonshot that the Vice President has been tasked with leading over the last year or so.

So obviously that’s good news.  But I don’t have any update on the President’s schedule in terms of how he’ll sign it, but I can assure you that he will.

John.

Q    Specific issues that kind of have this CR stalled right now -- the big one looks to be the coalminers' health benefits.  Where does the President stand?  Does he stand with Senate Democrats who emerged from a meeting and said they’re united on that issue?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m glad you asked about this.  The truth is, it’s quite cynical that Republicans in the Congress would adopt a position of only extending these benefits for the five-month life of the CR.  These are lives and livelihoods that hang in the balance.  And there should be bipartisan common ground to address the needs of these 20,000 coalminers who are slated to lose their health insurance at the end of the month.

So Democrats are ready to solve this problem, and it’s not lost on me the irony that Republicans are bragging about the kind of support they have from workers in coal country, particularly retirees in coal country, and now are prepared to just extend their health care for five months.  So we’ll have to see exactly whether or not that’s something that Republicans in Congress can fix before they send the bill to the White House.

There's one other aspect of the CR that you've heard me talk about before, but I think it merits repeating.  When the problems with the water supply in Flint, Michigan first became public, there was a hue and cry among Republicans on Capitol Hill about how the federal government had let down the people of Flint, Michigan.  The study, commissioned by the governor of Michigan, tells a somewhat different story.  The cause of this problem notwithstanding, there has been a robust response from the Obama administration to work closely with the Republican governor of Michigan, to work closely with the community in Flint to expedite relief and response resources to the community.

So you had FEMA passing out millions of bottles of water.  You had the Department of Health and Human Services standing up new operations so that additional health care could be provided to kids in that community that could be affected.  There were other community development resources that were mobilized to try to support the community that was going through this crisis.

The Obama administration even expedited some of the previously approved funding from Congress to address some of the more immediate infrastructure concerns of the community.  But all along, we've said that Republicans in Congress have a responsibility to do more about this problem than falsely accuse the federal government of malfeasance.  They've got a responsibility to try to solve the problem.  And there is a role for the United States Congress to play in terms of appropriating necessary resources to the community of Flint so that they can fix their water system, so that the children of that community are not drinking poisoned water.

Finally, in the fall, we did see a promise from Republicans that they would act on this.  But according to what you read in the newspapers -- well, let me just clarify one thing.  They, in the fall, promised to act on this before the end of the year.  But what we're seeing is that Republicans in Congress are actually planning to leave town for the year tomorrow.  And hopefully they're not going to do that without fulfilling their promise to the people of Flint that have already endured so much and are just asking the United States Congress to do something other than falsely criticize their political opponents on the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue.

Q    Is the President prepared to take a stand on one or either issue to shut this thing down tomorrow night, to force Republicans to act?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think it is our steadfast hope that it's not going to come to that, and that the kind of cynicism that Republicans have displayed with regard to coalminers and the cynicism that they have displayed when it comes to playing politics with trying to solve the problems in Flint -- maybe a little of the holiday spirit will encroach.  Maybe it will even happen at the congressional ball tonight.  Maybe getting all gussied up in the tuxedos and the gowns will remind those Republicans of the responsibility that they have to look out for the interests of working people while they're here in Washington. We'll see.

Q    Last one.  Are things stalled or dire enough that it might be Biden time?  Might be time to send the Vice President up?

MR. EARNEST:  To borrow a phrase?  Look, I know that the Vice President of the United States has certainly, time and time again, over his four-decade career in Washington, D.C. and his eight-year record as Vice President of the United States, weighed in to try to get Congress to look out for the interests of working people.  I don't know if that will be required this time, but I know he stands ready to serve if he's called.

Okay, thanks, everybody.  We'll see you tomorrow.

Q    Josh, anything on the defense policy bill that was just passed?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't have anything on that, but we'll follow up with you.

Q    Josh, anything else on the schedule today?  All you've got on the schedule is the Congressional Ball.  What's he working on today?

MR. EARNEST:  Just a couple of meetings with staff today.  But other than that, just spending time with members of Congress.

Q    If Hillary Clinton comes, will you tell us?

MR. EARNEST:  Not necessarily.  (Laughter.)

Have a good day, everybody.

END
1:44 P.M. EST
12:43 P.M. EST

MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Nice to see you all.  I do not have any comments at the start, so we can go straight to your questions.  Darlene, would you like to start?

Q    Yeah, thanks.  Would you give us a brief oral readout of the President's meeting on the Hill today with congressional members?

MR. EARNEST:  I'd be happy to.

Q    He was there for more than 90 minutes, so he must have had a lot to say.

MR. EARNEST:  He did have a lot to say.  And you've heard a little bit about his comments from some of the Democratic leaders who attended the meeting.

The President began his remarks by expressing his gratitude and pride for all of the progress that's been made over the last eight years.  And that gratitude was rooted not just in the political success that Democrats have had in advancing that agenda, but rooted in the tangible positive difference that their efforts have made in the lives of millions of Americans in communities large and small across the country.  And much of that work would not have been possible had the President not been able to work effectively with Democrats in Congress to get so much of that done, given the unreasonable and unprecedented obstruction that was erected by congressional Republicans.

The President continued saying that that should fuel their efforts moving forward.  And even though Democrats in Congress will not have the kind of cooperative partner that they've enjoyed for the last eight years in the White House, they still have a set of values and priorities that are worth fighting for.  And the good news is that those are values and priorities that most Americans agree with and strongly support, and those are values and priorities that lead to policies that make people's lives better and make our country stronger.  And the President expressed his -- the word that he used was "envy" for the opportunity that they have to keep up that fight.

And the President expressed his confidence in their ability not just to wage those fights with passion, but he expressed confidence in their ability to succeed -- again, both because the majority of the American people agree with them, whether it's investing in the kinds of policies that expand economic opportunity for middle-class families, whether it is expanding access to health care for every American making it not just a privilege but a right, making sure that there are consumer protections in place so that every American can't be discriminated against because they have a preexisting condition, and they can't be subject to lifetime caps that allow them to no longer benefit from insurance coverage if someone in their family gets sick.  These are the kinds of values and priorities that Democrats have long fought for, and these are the values and priorities that most Americans agree with.

So that was essentially the President's opening statement, and then he took questions from a substantial number of House and Senate Democrats.  And most of the questions centered on the proximate fight on Capitol Hill, which is the Republican attempt to repeal the Affordable Care Act, but the President had an opportunity to touch on some other areas, as well.  And the President really enjoyed the opportunity to go up there, and was warmly received, which he has been every time by Democrats on Capitol Hill, even when he's gone up there to address differences that they have.

But I got to tell you, in this case the President has gone to -- in the past, and you all have covered times when the President has traveled to Capitol Hill to try to bridge differences with Democrats on Capitol Hill -- that was not the case this time.  This time the President was there to affirm his support for the agenda that Democrats in Congress are fighting for.  And that unanimity will be a source of strength for Democrats in the years ahead.  And the President encouraged them to draw on it as they continue to fight for the values that they've been fighting for not just the last eight years, but for most of the people in the room they've been fighting for for their entire career in public service.

Q    And you mentioned other areas.  What other issues did they talk about besides health care?

MR. EARNEST:  There were a range of legislative issues that I think you would expect -- criminal justice reform, immigration reform, infrastructure -- some of the other issues that Democrats are likely to be working on over the next couple of years.

Q    To go back to the question of what he wants Democrats to do when it comes to health care, once the law is repealed, would he like Democrats to negotiate with Republicans to come up with a replacement?  Or would he like them to refuse to negotiate and just leave Republicans to be the ones to come up with a replacement on their own, since they didn’t vote for it in the first place and they're the ones that are anxious to repeal it?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me start out by answering your question by making a little news and saying that I agree with Congressman Rand Paul -- or Senator Rand Paul -- I just gave him a demotion -- Senator Rand Paul on something.  Senator Rand Paul wrote an op-ed in which he indicated that the people who repeal the Affordable Care Act are going to assume the blame for the chaos that ensues.  That's true.  And that's not a direct quote from his op-ed, but I think that is a faithful representation of what he wrote.

And I do think that's an illustration of something you've heard the President talk about quite a bit since November 9th, which is that there's a difference between delivering a poll-tested, sound bite-packaged promise on the campaign trail, and actually delivering on that promise once you assume the responsibility to govern the greatest country in the world.  And there is no better example than the Republicans who -- and I'm not just talking about the President-elect here, I'm talking about Republicans in states all across the country who have spent years excoriating the Affordable Care Act and vowing to do everything that they possibly can to repeal it.

The time has now come for them to consider how they're going to make good on that promise.  Republicans are in charge of the House of Representatives.  Republicans are in charge of the United States Senate.  And starting on January 20th, Republicans will be in charge of the White House.  And they’re going to have to decide how to make good on that promise to repeal and replace.  The challenge is, is that there are a lot of people in the great state -- the Commonwealth of Kentucky who are strong supporters of Senator Rand Paul, whose livelihood and, in some cases, life depends on the health care they receive from Obamacare, whether that’s expanded Medicaid or insurance that they’ve purchased in the marketplace run by the Commonwealth of Kentucky.

So you could understand why Rand Paul would have some anxiety about this plan -- about this strategy that’s put forward by Republicans, and the anxiety is palpable.  One of the most articulate Republicans on Capitol Hill is the Speaker of the House, and he did a news conference today where he was unable to explain why Republicans have not put forward their replacement plan.  He’s a smart guy, he’s spent years thinking about this.  He’s smart when it comes to politics, he’s smart when it comes to policy.  We’ve got profound differences and he’s got a different point of view, but there’s nobody that questions his intellect.  And even he can’t articulate exactly why they aren’t putting forward a replacement plan.  That does not bode well for Republicans making good on this promise.  But we’ll see.

One other reason, and this is something that the President did discuss with Democrats on Capitol Hill, and one of the reasons that this is particularly hard for Republicans, including Republicans who represent states like West Virginia and Kentucky, Tennessee -- not typically states that you consider as bastions of Obama supporters -- but these are states that have many communities that have been ravaged by the opioid epidemic.  Expanded Medicaid and health insurance that people purchase through Obamacare marketplaces offer support and service and treatment to people who are being ravaged -- or to people who are addicted to opioids and are trying to beat that addiction.

And we know that this is an issue that Republicans care about.  Republicans, at the end of last year, were bragging about a piece of government spending that they had passed to increase support for treatment for people who are fighting opioid addiction.  The worst way to fight the opioid crisis is to strip away health care from millions of Americans who rely on it.

A similar argument could be made about cancer research.  That was also included in the package that Republicans were bragging about passing at the end of last year.  What good is it to invest billions of dollars in cancer research if you’re going to prevent millions of Americans from being able to get a check-up once a year?  We don’t need to do a bunch of intensive academic research in cancer to understand what kinds of screenings are important and how important those screenings are, particularly for people of a certain age, a certain demographic, and a certain medical condition.

So these are the kinds of complexities that Republicans are now responsible for because they’re responsible for governing a country of 300 million people.

And so to go back to your more direct question -- and I think this is the other element of the answer that the President offered to Democrats -- is something that you’ve heard him say before -- in fact, since the day that he signed the Affordable Care Act into law -- which is the President believes that the country would benefit from Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill actually having a conversation about ideas for strengthening and improving the Affordable Care Act.

The President has never made the argument that the Affordable Care Act is perfect.  It’s done a whole lot of good for people, it saved lives, but it could be improved.  But that’s never the offer that Republicans have put forward.  Democrats have put it forward.  The President himself has put forward ideas for how to strengthen and improve the program, but there’s never been a willingness on the part of Republicans to do that.

If Republicans changed their tune, recognizing these complexities, and say, all right, Democrats, we acknowledge that tearing this thing down is not going to be good for the country and is a little more politically complicated than we anticipated, but you guys got to admit that there are some things that we can do to improve this proposal, that’s a conversation of an entire different color.  And that is a conversation that the President encouraged Democrats to consider engaging Republicans on, but that would require a different approach on the part of Republicans, but it’s a change in approach that President Obama would welcome.

You’d have to talk to Democrats on Capitol Hill what their reaction to that would be.  I suspect they would say it depends, but I think even if they say it depends, that does indicate that they’re open to it.

Ayesha.

Q    You talked about the -- going back to the health care meeting -- you talked about the importance of Democrats sticking together.  At least one Democrat Senator, Joe Manchin, didn’t attend the meeting.  He felt like -- although he also criticized Vice President-elect Pence for having his meeting, but he did say that to have President Obama come that it was kind of like a poison pill that is going to hurt bipartisanship.  I mean, at this point, is there any consideration that having the President come out so forcefully saying that Democrats need to do this or do that regarding health care, that it does make this a more partisan issue?
And then also, when you’re talking about strategies, if the Republicans are unwilling to work with the Democrats, what exactly does the President envision them doing?  Should they take some of the Republican tactics and begin -- I don’t know if it would be possible -- like shutting down government or doing things like that to get these issues -- to stop the repeal of Obamacare?  Like what specifically can they do if Republicans don't want to work with them?

MR. EARNEST:  Ayesha, I think a presidential critic would have to engage in remarkable rhetorical contortions to try to make the case that the President is the one who had made health care a partisan issue.  When you consider that the President hosted a meeting at the Blair House with Democratic and Republican leaders in Congress trying to get them to come together around some basic principles of health care reform, when you consider that the essence of the Affordable Care Act was cooked up by the Heritage Foundation and implemented successfully by a Republican governor in Massachusetts who, oh, by the way, happened to be the Republican nominee for President in 2012 -- that's been the approach that the President has taken.

Republicans have voted 50 times strictly along party lines to try to repeal the bill.  So I think it's hard for anybody to suggest -- seriously, at least -- that somehow the President has made this a partisan issue.  In fact, I just indicated the President is continuing not just willingness but desire to see Democrats and Republicans come together around some ideas to strengthen the bill.

With regard to Democratic unity, I can't speak to Senator Manchin’s schedule, but I've heard him speak about why repealing Obamacare would be a terrible idea for hundreds of thousands of people in the state that he represents in the United States Senate.  He agrees with the President and the Democrats in Congress, and is showing the same kind of concern that even people like Rand Paul are showing about the impact of repealing the bill.

So, again, you’ll have to ask -- I guess I would say it this way:  I would welcome the standard of Democratic unity being whether or not Senator Manchin agrees about the repeal of the Affordable Care Act.  I think that he would say what the President has said, which is that it can be improved, Democrats and Republicans should work together to improve it, but the idea of repealing it would be bad for the state and would have bad consequences for people all across the country.

Q    And when it comes to specific strategies, would the President support Democrats kind of shutting things down, or like what type of specific strategies could they take on if the Republicans don't --

MR. EARNEST:  Look, the President acknowledged in his meeting with the legislators that he’s not the one who is the expert in legislative mechanics, so he didn’t have any specific tactical advice for Democrats up there.  But the President believes that these are principles that are worth fighting for; that health care is not a privilege -- access to quality, affordable health care is not a privilege, it's a right; that the policies that limit the growth in health care costs for workers, for families, for business owners, and for the United States government is a good thing and something that should be protected; that people shouldn’t be discriminated against because they have preexisting conditions; that women shouldn’t be charged more by the insurance company just because they’re women; people shouldn’t have to worry about having to declare bankruptcy just because somebody in their family gets sick.

Those are principles that are worth fighting for.  And there were a lot of nodding heads when the President made that point.

Michelle.

Q    You were asked about should Democrats work with Republicans, and you mentioned it would require a different tactic.  So are you saying that if the tactic remains repeal, then Democrats should not work on negotiating that?

MR. EARNEST:  Repealing the Affordable Care Act would have devastating consequences for people all across the country, and it's not something that Democrats support, nor should they.  And we're seeing that a lot of Republicans are queasy about supporting it -- and they should be -- because of the obvious, tangible, direct consequences that that will have on the lives of millions of people across the country.  Twenty-two million people are going to lose their health insurance if the Affordable Care Act is repealed.  It's going to rip a hole in the deficit -- in the federal budget, and the deficit will go up if the Affordable Care Act is repealed.  That's not just my conclusion.  You can ask the CBO about that.

The implementation of the Affordable Care Act strengthened the Medicare trust fund and extended the life of the trust fund by 11 years.  Repealing the Affordable Care Act would roll back that progress.  And we've seen, since the Affordable Care Act went into effect, the slowest growth in health care costs in our nation’s history.

If Republicans want to go back to a day in which health care costs for everybody are skyrocketing, they can do that, but that's going to be bad for the economy and will create the kind of chaos that the American people will hold them accountable for.

Q    You talked about Democrats, that they'd be willing to work with Republicans to improve Obamacare, but only if it's not repealed.  Is that right?  Is that what you're saying?

MR. EARNEST:  Repealing the Affordable Care Act is not an improvement.  Looking for ways to design an increase in subsidies so that working families can get even more affordable access to health care that's available for purchase in the marketplace -- the President thinks that's a pretty good idea.  And that is -- subsidies is another word for tax cuts.  Ordinarily, you would think that would be something that Republicans would be able to support -- and not just able to support, enthused about supporting.

But that's not the reaction that we've seen from them.  That's just one idea that the President has put forward, but it's the kind of idea that's rooted in trying to find compromise that the President has been committed to since the day that he signed the Affordable Care Act into law.

Q    And you talked about Republican promises to repeal it, and now they're going to be -- they're going to have to be accountable for what comes next.  Today, Steve Scalise said that the President himself made promises that if you like your health care, you can keep it, and that he should actually be apologizing.  What's your response to that?

MR. EARNEST:  My response is simply that the President's record on the Affordable Care Act speaks for itself.  And when the President-elect put forward his nominee to be the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Congressman Tom Price, I predicted that at some point in his tenure as the Secretary of Health and Human Services he will stand at this podium and be putting forward a plan that he believes is the right one for the country.  And I said at the time that it should be measured against the progress that President Obama has made in reforming our health care system.  And I feel strongly about that.

And whether that's expanding access for health care so that 20 million Americans have access to health care, reducing the uninsured rate in this country to all-time lows, limiting the growth in health care costs, preventing people from being discriminated against because they have a preexisting condition, preventing people from having to declare bankruptcy because somebody in their family gets sick, preventing women from being charged more for their health insurance by their insurance company just because they get sick, extending the life of the Medicare trust fund, reducing the deficit by $3 trillion over 20 years -- that's the standard that President Obama has set.  That is the way that the American people can and should judge the President's record when it comes to health care reform.  And it's a record that the President is enormously proud of, not just because of the politics, but because of the impact that it's had on the lives of millions of people all across the country.

That's what he came into office promising to do.  That's what he campaigned on nine years ago in 2008 when he was crisscrossing the country, was taking on the kinds of tough challenges that Washington had been ignoring for too long.  And Democratic and Republican Presidents for 100 years had tried, or at least considered trying to take on the notion of health care reform.  President Obama took it on and succeeded in getting it done, and he's enormously proud of that.

Q    He apparently did talk about some tactics, at least generally, saying that Democrats should adopt some of the things that the Tea Party did in opposing Obamacare and they should go out to town halls and things like that.  Can you expand on that?  I mean, what do you think that would accomplish?  And does the President intend to keep working on this, even after he leaves office?

MR. EARNEST:  The President was making the point that Democrats need to place a priority on telling the story of people who benefitted from the law.  And there are lots of those stories to tell -- not just the 20 million Americans who got health insurance because of the Affordable Care Act that didn’t have it before, but the millions more Americans who are not being discriminated against because they have a preexisting condition, who are able to keep their child on their health insurance until age 26, who are not being charged more from their insurance company just because they're a woman.  These are the kinds of stories that we can tell.  Certainly the expansion of Medicaid has saved countless lives across the country.  And the President does believe that it would be an effective tactic, as this debate is waged inside the halls of Congress, to communicate with the American public about the stakes of this debate.

And the President feels strongly that this is a debate that Democrats can win because of the impact that repealing the law, as Republicans are vowing to do, would have on the lives of people in communities all across the country.  And that is something that shouldn’t just steel the spine of Democratic members of Congress; it's going to -- as I think is evident from Senator Paul's op-ed, it's going leave a lot of Republicans quite uneasy.

Q    So are we going to keep hearing from President Obama on this after he leaves?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, the President has been clear about his post-White House plans.  He's going to take a vacation, and he expects to be in a position that he can observe and follow the tradition that previous Presidents have shown, which is the country deserves an incoming President with an opportunity to go and lead the country in the direction that he believes is right, and this is a debate that will continue.  And the President also feels strongly that he's been on the national stage for more than eight years if you consider his national campaign to win the Oval Office.  It's time for the fresh blood.  It's time for the next generation of Democrats, and even some Republicans who share his values, to speak up and speak out.  It's time for them to get the spotlight.  It's time for them to have an opportunity to make that argument.  And the President believes that's important for the country.  It also ends up being important for the Democratic Party in terms of making sure that the next generation of Democrats is ready to take up the mantle.

Jordan.

Q    I just want to follow up on that, because Congressman Cummings told a group of reporters after the meeting that the President made it "very clear that as a citizen he's going to lend his voice to this fight."  So that seems to contradict a little bit what you said.  So where's the gulf there?  And does he in some ways plan to speak out about this health care issue after he leaves office?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, the President made clear his solidarity with congressional Democrats, and there's no doubt about that among anybody in the room.  But, yes, being a citizen is different than being the President of the United States or being an elected member of Congress.  And being a former President does necessarily give you a larger platform, but the President is hopeful that he'll be able to observe the kinds of standards that previous Presidents have in giving the next President the opportunity to succeed.

But look, the President has been pretty blunt about his approach here.  He's talked a lot, even while in office, about how important the office of citizen is both in terms of educating yourself about the issues and engaging in a democratic process.  The President will certainly do that.  And the President will be interested in supporting Democrats in Congress.  He stands with them in solidarity.  But there are some limits to what former Presidents typically do once they leave office.

Julianna.

Q    Thanks.  Just to clarify on that, it sounds like on the one hand you're saying he's resigned to sitting on the sidelines and watching Republicans dismantle the Affordable Care Act, and the same time there's the community organizer in him that would be trying to lend a hand to the effort to salvage elements of the law.  So where does that exactly leave him?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, "resigned" is not at all the word that I would use.  I think it was evident from the Democrats in the room that the President feels quite passionate about all of these issues.  And the President is confident that the kind of argument that Democrats can put forward is a winning one.  So the President continues to be very confident, particularly on this issue of the Affordable Care Act, in the ability of Democrats to make the kind of argument that's going to resonate deeply with the American people.  And there's already some evidence that Republicans are uneasy about this, both as -- and so the two pieces of evidence that I cited today are the op-ed from Senator Paul and the inability of one of the most articulate Republicans on Capitol Hill to explain why Republicans don’t have their own replacement plan to put forward, even though he's the guy who's responsible for putting that plan forward.  So I think that is an indication that Republicans are already starting to reckon with the challenge of keeping this promise.

At the same time, the President acknowledges that he's leaving the national stage.  That's what the Constitution requires.  That's certainly consistent with his wife's preferences.  And it's going to be time for somebody else to pick up the mantle.  Does that mean that the President is any less committed to these issues than he was before?  Of course not.  But it does mean that the President expects to be in a position that he can observe the kinds of customs and courtesy, frankly, that was afforded to him by his predecessor.

Now, the President has also been clear, and the President did discuss this in the meeting as well, that he's hopeful that this won't happen.  But if there are basic, fundamental American values that are undermined by a specific policy proposal, then he may feel the need to speak out.  But it is his hope, and I would say even his expectation, that that's not something that he will have to do.

And I think the other thing I want to point out here -- and I think this is relevant to the entire context -- what I'm trying to lay out and describe to you is the President's plans for the first year or two that he's out of office.  And President Obama is obviously leaving this office at a young age -- he's just 55 -- and I think that there's -- he still has a lot of ambition and a lot more that he would like to do.  Most of it he hopes he will be able to do behind the scenes in terms of continuing to stay true to his roots as a community organizer, and motivating and inspiring and even offering training to people who feel called in a similar direction.  He wants to make sure that public servants, or people who aspire to public office are people who can get trained in the fundamentals of community organizing.  He wants to make sure that young people around the world are exposed to the kinds of values and principles and norms and customs and traditions of the United States when it comes to democracy and citizen engagement and respect for all people, and even entrepreneurship.  These are things that the President has talked about as a President and something that he hopes to continue in his post-presidency.

So I don’t want to leave you with the impression that there's still not a lot of important work for former President Obama to be engaged in -- there is.  He recognizes that.  And he's got a long to-do list.  But that is different than being engaged in the same back-and-forth that he's responsible for engaging in as President.

Q    So you're saying he has not closed the door to, let's say, over the next six months to a year, if he sees the direction of the Affordable Care Act, or whatever it would be replaced with, moving in a way that he is not comfortable with, that you said he feels like it doesn’t hold up to certain American values, that he would lend his voice in some way or another to that debate?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I think the President's hope and expectation is that he will be able to allow others to take up this mantle -- with his strong support -- to carry this fight, and to do so publicly and engage in the back-and-forth.  And that's the expectation that he has and that's what he intends to pursue.

And I think that is the best description of his plans.  And, yes, I acknowledge that that stops short of entirely ruling out any sort of contingency that may prompt him to speak out publicly.  And I'm being intentional about that.  But I want to be clear that the President does not envision routine, regular engagement on these issues publicly.  That's the responsibility of Democrats in Congress; it's the responsibility of the next generation of Democrats.  And, look, it's a remarkable opportunity.

So I go back to the way the President began his remarks to Democrats today.  They’re on the playing field fighting for the issues and priorities and values that this party and this country has long stood for.  And there’s nobility in that.  And he admires those who are willing to do it.  He is extraordinarily proud of the way that they are choosing to fight for those values and those priorities, and he will stand with them as they do it.  But ultimately it's a fight that they will lead.

Ron.

Q    Specifically, the Republicans talk about the soaring premiums and triple-digit increases in places, and high deductibles that make the policies in some cases somewhat useless because of these costs.  Now, I think your argument has been that subsidies and tax credits sort of illuminate that argument.  What’s the truth here as far as you're concerned?  Because again, there have been premium increases.  There are high deductibles.  And the other one they argue about is choice being limited.  So what are your numbers about premiums and deductibles specifically?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, obviously, this is the kind of debate that we welcome and one that I think leaves Republicans uneasy, because -- and let me explain to you why.  When we're talking about premium increases, it's important to note that the vast majority of Americans get their health insurance through their employer, and premium increases --

Q    Right.  3.8 percent or something.

MR. EARNEST:  Just 3.4 percent.

Q    Sorry.

MR. EARNEST:  That's okay, I've got the numbers in front of me; I've got an advantage.  So it's important that the vast majority of Americans have benefitted from the law because we know that the Affordable Care Act has had a positive impact in keeping the growth in those health care costs low for the vast majority of Americans.

So there is a smaller group of Americans that doesn’t get health insurance through their employer.  And before the Affordable Care Act went into effect, these were people who didn’t have access to health care, or the only health care they had access to was health care that was riddled with loopholes that didn’t actually provide the kind of protections the insurance companies promised.  So what the Affordable Care Act did is it essentially established a marketplace and said this is the benchmark for policies that can be sold publicly.  So people had access to quality health care.

Now, the question is you’ve got that benchmark and so there’s quality health care that's available for people who don't get health insurance through their employer -- how do we make it affordable.  And the way that we make it affordable through the Affordable Care Act -- the aptly named Affordable Care Act -- is that more than 70 percent of the people who go shopping at that marketplace of quality plans will get assistance, subsidies, from the federal government that will allow them to purchase those plans for less than $100 a month.

That's a good deal.  That's about the cost of a cellphone.  It's not free, but it's a good deal.  And it does give them access to health care that they didn’t previously have.

The question is, for the three in ten, or less than three in ten Americans who don't get health insurance through their employer -- so this is a minority of the minority -- there has been a lot of volatility in some markets with health insurance.  And so the question is, what do we do for those people?  The President has put forward some ideas.  One of the ideas that he’s put forward is to expand subsidies and make it easier for more people to get access to subsidies, or higher subsidies, so that more people can get access to that affordable health insurance.

Another idea that the President had put forward is --

Q    But that essentially raises the numbers, right?  The government cost raises -- does it not?

MR. EARNEST:  It potentially could, but we’d be happy to --

Q    And that's the argument against this, that it's more government involvement, that it costs more.

MR. EARNEST:  More government involvement only to the extent that it is providing tax credits to Americans to make it easier for them to choose which health insurance they would like to buy.  So I don't buy the argument that it is more government involvement.  I do understand the argument that it is more government spending.  But it's a paltry increase when you consider that over the next two decades the Affordable Care Act is going to reduce the deficit by $3 trillion.  So the increase in subsidies and the cost of doing so is a drop in the bucket when you consider the long-term deficit decrease associated with the Affordable Care Act.

Q    So why, if you take yourself away from this for a minute -- not too far away but -- (laughter) --

MR. EARNEST:  Sometimes I would like to.  (Laughter.)

Q    You will soon.  And you just said something about how the President feels very confident that they have an argument that will resonate with the American people.  Well, it didn’t in the election clearly.  And you would say that this was, in many ways, the defining and animating issue for the Republicans -- repeal.  How does the President explain that, this distance?

MR. EARNEST:  Because there is a difference between campaigning and governing.

Q    No, no, no, I get that --

MR. EARNEST:  Right?  So it is easy to go and stand on the campaign trail and make a bunch of promises about repealing and replacing the Affordable Care Act.  It’s another thing altogether to come into office and be responsible for the 22 million people who will lose health insurance if you do that.

Q    So you’re saying it’s just a failure of messaging?  This is the Democrats' and the President’s, perhaps, failure to show up every place, as he says, and go to Iowa a hundred times and all?  I mean, is that -- because you still argue on the merits.  You think if you look at the numbers that this argument about premium increases and deductible increases, it’s just not there, it’s just not true.

MR. EARNEST:  I think the argument is, simply, that Republicans are the ones who now bear the burden of explaining how the American people are going to benefit from their ideas.  And yes, Democrats have shown how difficult that is.  But we’ve been willing to pay that political price to make a difference in the lives of millions of Americans across the country, and we’ve got a good argument to make because we’re right on the merits.

So not only does the complexity make it harder for Republicans to actually explain what impact their policies would have.  There’s also the rather inconvenient fact that the Republicans ideas are actually bad for people.  They’re bad for the economy.  They’re bad for small businesses who are trying to pay for insurance for their employees.  They’re bad for people who have to purchase their insurance through the market.  They’re bad for people who have to purchase their insurance, or get their insurance through their employer.  They’re bad for the U.S. government that will see the deficit skyrocket if Republicans follow through on their plan to replace the Affordable Care Act.

So as complicated as it’s been for Democrats to make a compelling case about the positive impact of our plan, it’s going to be even more complicated for Republicans, not just because they have to delve into the complexity, but because they have bad ideas.  And trying to convince people, in the space of that complexity, that their bad ideas are actually good is going to make it even harder for them.  And when you consider how wrapped around the axle they are on day one of the new Congress, I think that would explain some of the President’s confidence.

Steven.

Q    Josh, since you’ve been to the podium, the Senate has passed the budget resolution.  Senator Paul voted against it, but there were 51 votes --

MR. EARNEST:  Boy, that is a pretty narrow margin, isn’t it?

Q    So what do you make of it?

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah, well, I make of that -- well, first of all, the bill they passed today, this suggestion to instruct Congress -- you know the lingo better than I do; I haven’t worked on Capitol Hill.  But essentially, this is the first step in that process.

The actual vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act is one that’s coming.  And I anticipate a vigorous debate between now and then, particularly when you consider that when -- some of colleagues here in the White House have had a little more experience working on Senate campaigns than I do -- but it sounds like 51 Republican senators may have cast the deciding vote to take away health care from 22 million Americans.  They may have cast the deciding vote to blow a hole in the deficit.  They may have cast a deciding vote to shorten the lifespan of Medicare and to weaken it by a decade or more.  They may have cast the deciding vote to take away protections that prevent people from being discriminated against because they have preexisting conditions.  You see where I'm going here.

And Senator Rand Paul looks like he's eager to avoid being on receiving end of those critiques.  And he's not a particularly vulnerable incumbent -- at least yet.  We'll see.  Thank you for the opportunity to answer the question.

Jennifer.  Nice to see you.  Welcome to the White House.

Q    Thanks.  So Julian Assange from WikiLeaks -- what's the administration's current assessment on him?  Should he be considered as credible or should he be considered a criminal or a fugitive.  What's the assessment?

MR. EARNEST:  The assessment I think that I can share is the assessment that was put forward by the intelligence community -- all 17 agencies of the intelligence community -- on October 7th, 2016.  And it said in part this -- I'm just going to directly quote from them:  "The recent disclosures of alleged hacked emails on sites like DCLeaks.com and WikiLeaks, and by the Guccifer 2.0 online persona, are consistent with the methods and motivations of Russian-directed efforts.

Mr. Assange, of course, is famously in charge of WikiLeaks.  So I think that's a pretty definitive statement from the 17 different agencies of the United States government that deal in intelligence.  And this is an assessment that they put out back in October before the election.

Lalit.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  I wanted to ask you a question, basically a follow-up on the retweet done by the U.S. Ambassador to India, Richard Verma.  In the retweet, he has tweeted a two-and-a-half minute video of three (inaudible) in Mumbai, and (inaudible) offering the job of a class teacher to President Obama after he retires on January 20th.  Has the President seen it?  Is he planning to take up that offer?

MR. EARNEST:  Lalit, I have to admit I have not seen the retweet, but why don't we take a look at it and we'll get back to you with an answer, okay?

Q    And when the President hands over his mantle to Trump on January 20th, what are the things he would like Mr. Trump to do when he becomes the President on the front of India-U.S. relationship?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President has -- President Obama has invested deeply in strengthening the relationship between the United States and the world's largest democracy in India.  And the President believes that there are profound national security, diplomatic and economic benefits for strengthening those ties.  So I haven't heard the incoming President articulate what ideas he has for the relationship between the United States and India, but President Obama has certainly found that relationship one that's worth investing in.  And he certainly is optimistic about the ability to strengthen the United States economically and to enhance our influence around the globe by strengthening our relationship with India.

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Following the Senate vote there, on the Donald Trump tweet about the delay in the intel briefing until Friday, is that an accurate description of how --

MR. EARNEST:  It's not.

Q    Can you sort of explain that process, and I don't know if you can explain why he said what he said.

MR. EARNEST:  I can't.  And fortunately, that's not my job.  What I can tell you is that the intelligence community has been working at the direction of the President to put together a report that reflects their consensus view about malicious cyber activity in the context of the 2016, 2012, and 2008 presidential elections.  This is only a month or so ago that the President directed the intelligence community to work on this report, and he asked them to produce this report before he leaves office on January 20th.  I can tell you that the intelligence community will make good on meeting that deadline with some time to spare.  And based on what I’ve been told by the intelligence community, they have not encountered any delays in producing that report.

One of the other notable things is that the President didn’t just -- in addition to directing them to compile the report, the President directed the intelligence community to both brief the contents of the report to relevant members of Congress on Capitol Hill and to the President-elect and his team to make sure that they understood exactly how serious this is.  So that’s something that the President directed the intelligence community to do, and I’m confident that they’ll make good on that promise as well.

I think the real question that looms is a question that’s been raised by some of the public comments or tweets from the President-elect, which is just simply, who are you going to believe?  On the one hand, you’ve got the Russians and the aforementioned Mr. Assange.  On the other side, you’ve got the 17 intelligence agencies of the United States government, outside cyber experts that have taken a look at this situation, you’ve got Democrats on Capitol Hill, you’ve got Republicans on Capitol Hill, and at least one adviser to Mr. Trump expressing concern about Russia’s malicious activity in cyberspace in the context of the election.

So there’s a pretty stark line that’s been drawn, and the President-elect will have to determine who he’s going to believe.  And the decision that he makes about that I think will have long-term consequences for the way he chooses to govern the country.

Q    How confident are you that that report will make its way to the hands of lawmakers before the end of this week?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have a timeframe to set on it, but I can tell you -- I can confirm that the intelligence community will meet their deadline of January 20th with ample time to spare.

Q    Is it fair to say that the President’s trip to the Hill today was also, in part, to preserve and protect his legacy, not just the Affordable Care Act but also to encourage Democrats to fight for the many pieces of legislation, executive orders -- to really uphold his vision and their vision, presumably, moving forward?  Is it fair to characterize his trip to the Hill in that way?

MR. EARNEST:  I think the way that I would characterize the President’s trip to the Hill is it was an opportunity to say thank you to Democrats in Congress who have been fighting shoulder-to-shoulder with him to move the country in a direction that’s more fair, that’s more just, that’s more prosperous, and that’s more safe.  And over the last eight years, they’ve made remarkable progress in doing that.  And the President has spoken on many occasions about how much of that progress would not have been possible without the tenacity and courage and passion and commitment of Democrats in Congress.

And so he wanted to say thank you, not just in terms of how appreciative he is for their cooperation and their collegiality, but also to thank them on behalf of the country for the progress that we have made.  But he also went up there to encourage them, and to motivate them, and to inspire them that even as he leaves and even as somebody who has not committed to working with Democrats on Capitol Hill enters the White House, that Democrats have a set of values and an agenda that’s worth fighting for.  And Democrats have the benefit, the advantage of being strongly unified around that agenda and around those values, and that will serve them very well because Republicans aren’t.

Republicans on Capitol Hill aren’t unified, and they don’t appear to be particularly unified when it comes to a bunch of priorities that are being decided by the incoming President-elect, including on the issue of Russia’s malicious cyber activity and their interference in our democracy.  So that is an advantage that Democrats have, it is an advantage from which they should draw strength, and it is an advantage that I think will serve them very well in the years ahead as they do fight for a set of priorities that President Obama has been trying to advance for the last eight years.

Q    Given that, last question, is it then fair to say that he is not concerned at all about his legacy, about a dramatic change happening here in Washington once he leaves office?  Or would you take the opposite view that he is concerned about a great many of the ideas that he had will be, frankly, undone?

MR. EARNEST:  I think the President is concerned about the impact that Republicans would have if they made good on their promises to dismantle so much of the progress that we have made over the last eight years.  And his concern is rooted in the fact that millions of Americans have access to health care because of what President Obama and Democrats in Congress were able to achieve with the Affordable Care Act.  Rolling that back is going to have a negative impact on the lives of those 22 million Americans, but that’s what Republicans are promising to do.

Democrats in Congress and the administration worked effectively together to implement the Wall Street Reform legislation that has made sure that taxpayers will no longer be on the hook for bailing out big banks who make risky bets that go bad, and they implemented that in a way that the economy still thrived.  The stock market more than doubled since that bill was signed into law, and the President is pleased with that progress and is concerned about the impact that it would have on our economy if Republicans roll all that back.

The same is true when it comes to a range of national security issues.  The same is true when it comes to investments in clean energy.  The same is true when it comes to investments in education.  So that’s what the President’s concern is.  And the truth is, the only people who -- well, I’d say it this way:  The people who are in by far the best position to prevent that from happening are congressional Democrats who are unified around the idea that those things are worth fighting for, and the President is confident that they will, and the President is confident that they’re going to have some success in doing it.

Sean.

Q    I wanted to follow up on one exchange you had with Michelle a little earlier.  You said that after the President has been on the national stage for eight years that “it’s time for fresh blood.”

I take it you were referencing congressional Democrats, but does the President have satisfaction in the current ranks of the Democratic leadership given that there really hasn’t been much fresh blood there?  We see Charles Schumer moving up to majority leader in the Senate, but he was already a senior Democrat in the Senate, and the House Democratic leadership looks the same, at least at its highest levels.

MR. EARNEST:  The reference that I was making there was certainly to congressional Democrats, but not just to congressional Democrats.

There’s an opportunity for mayors and governors and other people who aspire to elective office to make their voices heard.  It’s not just people who are in elective office who have a responsibility to speak out on the most important issues facing the country.  Citizens have that same kind of responsibility, and the President does believe that when he leaves the stage there will be big shoes to fill, and not likely by one person, at the risk of mixing metaphors.

And the President is hopeful, I would say even confident, that there will be Democrats in Congress and across the country who step up to answer the call to fight for the kinds of democratic values that are good the country, that make America more prosperous, that make America more safe, that make America more fair, and that will serve the country and the party very well.

With regard to congressional Democrats, the President has deep respect and admiration for the ability of the congressional leaders that have been there the entire time that he’s been here for the last eight years.  But I think even those leaders would be the first ones to acknowledge they’re not going to be able to do it alone.  We’re going to need to see rank-and-file Democrats standing up and making the case, not just on ABC News, but back home, talking to their people in the communities and making the case to local newspapers and on local radio and on local television stations about what Democrats are fighting for and about what Democrats believe in and why it’s in the best interest of the people in those communities.

So at one point during the meeting today -- I don’t remember who exactly it was -- one of the leaders had suggested that all the newly-elected members of the Democratic caucus should raise their hand to be recognized, and a lot of hands went up.  I’m sure somebody was taking attendance at the meeting; I wasn’t.  I don’t think that every member of the Democratic caucus was there.  I don’t think Senator Manchin was the only one who didn’t attend.  I don’t know what reasons they may have for that, but it sure looked like a lot of the people who were elected for the first time and are serving their second full day in office as a member of the United States Congress spent an hour and a half with the President today.

And I think that’s a pretty good indication that the President’s words and message has resonated deeply with them, has certainly played at least some part in inspiring them to seek public office.  And I think that means that they’re more than energized for the fight ahead.

Q    But as the President looked around at the Senate and the House Democratic caucuses, he must have seen that the numbers are a lot smaller than they have been in previous years.  And particularly after the wave election in 2010, a lot of this was a result of the political capital he spent on Obamacare, right?  That there was a wave back against the President for passing that legislation.  Does he at all acknowledge the political capital that was spent then and have any regret of some of the other legislative priorities he didn’t get through, like criminal justice reform, immigration reform, infrastructure -- those other things you mentioned earlier?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I think there’s a lot of analysis that can be done of the 2010 election, and let me just stipulate that I disagree with the analysis that you put forward about that solely being a backlash against the Affordable Care Act.  I think the President would acknowledge that capital was spent in terms of passing and implementing the Affordable Care Act.  But to a person, I feel confident that Democrats would agree that it was worth it if that’s what’s required to get 20 million Americans covered on insurance.  If we’re going to outlaw insurance companies from discriminating against people with preexisting conditions or charging women more just because they’re women -- it’s worth it.  That’s the reason you got into the fight, that’s the reason you ran for public office in the first place.  It’s the reason that you chose to engage in public debate in the first place.

So, yes, the President is proud of that and the progress that we've made as a result.  Does that answer your question?

Q   Yes.  I have one quick other question.  So as far as the Russian hacks go, I know normally you can’t discuss sources and methods and how you guys are given intelligence, but can you at least characterize the sort of intelligence that’s coming in that proves that this was a Russian hack?  Is it digital fingerprints that you’re tracing back to a computer in Russian possession?  Is it human sourcing, that you’re intercepting phone calls and hearing Russians talk about this kind of thing?  Or where is the confidence coming from?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’m obviously quite limited in what I can say from here, but I think there are a couple of things that I can point to that I think answer the questions that you’ve raised.  It’s essentially two.

The first is, the statement that was issued by the intelligence community in October of 2016 before the election, making clear that Russia was interfering in our election represented the consensus view of 17 different intelligences agencies.  That’s not usually the way intelligence works.  That kind of unanimity of opinion, particularly when the stakes are so high, is notable.  The decision by the intelligence community not just to reach that conclusion, but to make it public, is notable.  And I think it reflects the depth of their confidence in that assessment.

But your question goes to what explains the depth of that confidence -- why.  I think the only thing that -- the thing that I can certainly say from here is that there was a release last week of the Joint Analysis Report that was issued by the Department of Homeland Security and the FBI, and included in that report was specific technical advice to computer network operators, systems administrators across the country and around the world about steps that they could take to protect their networks from malicious Russian cyber activity.

I think that’s an indication that there was a deep technical analysis that was done.  And being able to put forward that technical analysis so that people could protect themselves from the Russians I think reflects the work that was done that pretty definitively ties this back to the Russians.

The other effect of releasing that information means that Russia now has to go back to the drawing board and change some of their tactics.  If people who are responsible for defending computer networks are now aware of the places from which those attacks originate, if they're aware of the kinds of tactics that are used in erecting and executing those attacks, if they're aware of the kinds of software, the malware that is used and they can defend their networks against that malware, that's going to make things a lot more difficult for the Russians.  So that isn’t just an effort to erect defenses to repel malicious Russian activity, it's actually to set back Russian efforts to carry out those kinds of attacks.

So I think that is an indication of the depth of the analysis that was done.  It's technical in nature, I would stipulate that from the beginning.  But I think it's an indication that the intelligence community is following more than their gut instinct.  And I think the way that you can tell that is based on the technical analysis that was put forward, and the demonstration of the conviction in their analysis by expressing their unanimous opinion publicly before election about what exactly happened.

Q    It sounds like, though, that you're pointing more to the digital fingerprint more so than human intelligence.  Is there any concern that that could be manipulated if somebody was so smart to manipulate the intel so that it made it look like it was Russia?

MR. EARNEST:  I think what I'm pointing to is the one thing that I feel like I can point to publicly to substantiate some of the claims that we've made.  It doesn’t mean that there isn’t additional evidence out there; I'm sure that there is.  But there is a priority that's placed on protecting sources and methods.  And with regard to sort of this question about manipulating that kind of digital evidence, I felt confident based on that expertise and technical know-how of the United States intelligence community that that's something that they considered before putting forward that technical information and before putting forward their unanimous high-confidence assessment about what exactly happened.

Bill Press.  Nice to see you, Bill.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Nice to see you.  Happy New Year.

MR. EARNEST:  Happy New Year.

Q    I was wondering, having you had an opportunity yet to meet with or to speak with the person who's been designated as your successor at the podium?

MR. EARNEST:  I did have an opportunity yesterday to meet with Sean Spicer, the gentleman that has been hired by the President-elect to succeed me as the White House Press Secretary.

Q    (Inaudible.)

MR. EARNEST:  I was going to say, I believe that I had met Sean in passing previously at a social occasion, but this is the first time I had had an opportunity to sit down with him and have a conversation.  And yesterday, in my office, we sat down with him and his assistant, and Jen Psaki joined for that conversation, and we had a long conversation about what it's like to work at the White House.  And we certainly talked about some of the complicated logistics of working in this environment, but we also talked a little bit about the approach to the job that Jen and I have taken in fulfilling our roles at this White House.

And it was a good conversation, and I know that he's excited about the opportunity -- and he should be.  Getting to work at the White House is a genuine honor, and certainly having the opportunity to stand at this podium and speak to all of you, and engage in a debate about a set of issues that I certainly feel strongly about, and to advocate for a President that I respect enormously is a genuine honor.  And I think Sean sees it the same way, and he should.

Q    It has certainly been a question among many of us:  Did the subject of whether or not he intends to hold daily press briefings come up in your conversation?

MR. EARNEST:  I'll let him speak to whatever plans that he has.

Q    If it did come up or if it does come up, from your perspective, having been there now for, what, the last four or five years, what would your advice be about the importance or the wisdom of the daily press briefings?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the argument that I've made in the past is I think there is genuine value to the day-to-day engagement that I have with all of you.  The symbolic value of the President hiring somebody to play a senior role in his staff, to come out here every day on camera, on the record, and answer whatever question you guys dream up, and be an advocate for the policies that the President has prioritized and be held accountable for knowing what the President thinks, faithfully expressing his view, and being factual and accurate in making that case -- that's a healthy part of our democracy.  There aren’t many countries in the world that encourage this kind of engagement.  So I think it's genuinely a good thing.

I think there are some aspects of it that are not as efficient as they may have been a generation ago.  Before iPhones and Blackberrys and email, there were many fewer opportunities for the press corps to interact with White House staff.  But the truth is, I think there's a lot of symbolic value to doing this, and it's good for the country, and I think the President believes that it serves his interest well to have somebody out here making an argument in support of his policies.  And I think it certainly serves your viewers and listeners and readers to hear firsthand from somebody at the White House who's willing to stand up here and put their name behind a forceful case and an explanation of what the President is doing and why he's doing it.

But obviously the incoming administration will have to make up their own mind about the wisdom of pursuing a strategy that the President believes in because of its role in our democracy, but also because of the way that it's contributed to his success as President.

Dave.

Q    Josh, Democratic leaders in the California legislature announced today that they've hired Eric Holder as outside counsel to represent the state in what they anticipate will be legal battles against the Trump administration.  Does the White House think it's appropriate for a former Cabinet member to get paid to fight the policies of a new administration?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I've seen only the headlines of some of the news reports that you're citing, and there's nothing that struck me in reading those reports that there's anything at all inappropriate about what Mr. Holder was choosing to pursue.

First of all, I'll say that it's not surprising to me at all that the state of California would want to choose somebody as smart and as experienced and well-versed in these policy issues as Mr. Holder is.  It's one of the reasons that President Obama chose him to be the Attorney General.  Obviously, Mr. Holder is a telegenic, articulate advocate for a whole set of issues, and I suspect that the people of the state of California will benefit from him putting those same skills to work, advocating for them.  And it doesn't strike me that there's anything wrong with it.

Q    The President obviously has been very close to Mr. Holder over the years, considers him a friend.  Did he know about this?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven't spoken to the President about Mr. Holder's new job, but it's certainly true that the President holds Mr. Holder in high regard, both for his intellectual and legal abilities, but also because he's a pretty good guy.

Jared, I'll give you the last one.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  A couple different versions of the Affordable Care Act repeal being discussed.  On one hand, you've got reconciliation, which the Senate parliamentarian has ruled doesn't apply to all of the law but only certain parts of it.  And then you've got the Vice President-elect and Sean Spicer discussing today the possibility of executive actions that could be taken on day one.  Does the legislative team here at the White House have any sense of what could be done to the Affordable Care Act by executive action, and whether any of that would be, in this administration's mind, an improvement of the law?

MR. EARNEST:  I am not aware of what the incoming team may have been referring to with regard to potential changes through executive action that they're looking at.  I think the thing that I can faithfully relate to you is that if we had conceived of a way for the President to use executive action to strengthen the Affordable Care Act, then I assure you we would have done it.  But look, I think we'll have to let the incoming administration provide some more insight into what their plans are before I can comment on it.

Q    Do you think that it signals strength or weakness of the plan that executive action is one of the first out of the gate moves for this, or do you not have enough to go on?

MR. EARNEST:  I think it's hard to discern at this point exactly what their plans are.  I just think that whatever changes they choose to make, they'll be held to a rather high standard for assessing the success or failure of those changes.  And we'll be counting on all of you to hold them to that standard.

Thanks, everybody.  We'll see you tomorrow.

END
1:54 P.M. EST
12:20 P.M. EST

MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Nice to see you all.  I do not have any announcements at the top, so we can go straight to your questions.  Darlene, do you want to start?

Q    I have a couple different topics today.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.

Q    First, Donald Trump this morning said that he was going to be stepping away from the business to focus on running the country, because that's more important.  And I was wondering if that announcement comes as welcome news to this White House.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Darlene, ultimately the relevant observers here will have to conclude based on the details of the announcement once it's been made.  So there's obviously an Office of Government Ethics that is charged with significant responsibilities in terms of ensuring that government officials are adhering to ethical standards.  Certainly, Congress has oversight responsibilities that should transcend partisan loyalty.  Congress has an institutional responsibility to provide oversight, even if it is a Republican-led Congress and Republican-led Oversight Committee.  They have responsibilities of providing oversight, even if it’s a Republican-led administration.

In addition to that, all of you are going to have to spend some time demanding transparency and demanding some answers to tough questions.  And I know at least the people in this room are pretty good at that.  And ultimately the American public will be counting on you to get answers to determine whether or not the questions that have been raised or the questions that may still persist in their mind have been satisfied based on the steps that the President-elect will announce.  None of that is for me to judge.

What I can tell you is what President Obama's approach has been, and it has simply been to abide by an extraordinarily high standard of not just following the letter of ethical requirements, but following the spirit of those ethical requirements, and even going to great lengths to avoid even the appearance of a potential conflict of interest.  For example, when President Obama took office, he, with the exception of his home in Chicago, basically liquidated his assets and purchased Treasury bonds.  He did that at a time when interest rates in this country were at historic lows.  It was not a particularly lucrative investment, you might say.  But the President was willing to put his own financial interests aside and focus on running on the country.  And he benefitted from that.  He's obviously not been implicated or involved in any sort of personal scandal.

He's demanded that the same kind of standard be met by people who have served in this administration.  And I think that's why you've seen, over eight years, thousands of people have served in the Obama administration, and there's been no major and personal scandal among a senior official in the Obama administration.  And that's because of the commitment -- at least in part because of the commitment -- to this high ethical standard.  But ultimately, the President-elect will have to determine what sort of standard he will abide by and what sort of standard he'll ask those who serve in his administration to abide by.

Q    House Democrats have reelected Nancy Pelosi as their leader.  Is there any comment from the White House on that?  I know the President was very positive about her at the news conference in Peru when he got a question about it.  Is there anything more to add?

MR. EARNEST:  Not really -- primarily because this is a decision for House Democrats to make in terms of how best to organize themselves and who should lead their caucus.  The President has spoken on more occasions than I can count about how this country and his administration has benefitted from the kind of leadership and toughness and character that Leader Pelosi has demonstrated throughout her career in the House of Representatives, but particularly over the last eight year in which she served in a leadership position while President Obama has been in office.  They haven’t agreed on every issue, the President and the Democratic Leader in the House, but they have been able to work effectively together.  And the President himself has said on many occasions that so many of the accomplishments of this administration would not have been possible without the skill, toughness, values, and leadership of Nancy Pelosi.

Q    Finally, the President has a meeting this afternoon with the Nobel Laureates.  Is it a practice to invite all of the prize-winners to come to meet with the President?  Can you say who will be attending that meeting?

MR. EARNEST:  What we have done every year is we've invited those Americans who have been awarded a Nobel Prize to come and visit with the President prior to the -- prior to traveling to Norway to accept the prize.

So the President is looking forward to renewing that tradition again.  And I believe that several of the winners, but not all of them, will be in attendance at the White House.  Those of you who are wondering, unfortunately Bob Dylan will not be at the White House today, so everybody can relax.

But we can get you a list of those who will be participating in that greet with the President later this afternoon.

Q    Did Bob Dylan give a reason for why he can't be here this afternoon?

MR. EARNEST:  He didn't.  I know that he has indicated publicly that he’s honored to have received the Nobel Prize, but I know that he’s also indicated that he does not intend to travel to Norway to participate in the ceremonies in which he’d be awarded the prize.  Again, based on what I’ve seen in published reports, I think the Norwegians are hopeful that he’ll choose another time over the course of the coming year to travel to Norway and give a speech and accept his prize.  But that will be up to him.

There have been previous occasions -- at least one previous occasion where Mr. Dylan has had an opportunity to visit the White House, and the President enjoyed meeting him there.  But he’ll not be here today.

Ayesha.

Q    Thank you.  So, late yesterday, Carrier announced a deal with President-elect Donald Trump to keep close to a thousand jobs at an air conditioner plant in Indianapolis.  I guess all of the details of the deal haven’t been announced.  But I was wondering, does the White House have any thoughts on kind of the strategy that has been employed to maybe lean on a private company to get them to keep jobs in the U.S.?  Is that a strategy that the White House approves of, that thinks it’s a good thing to do?  I guess I just wanted thoughts on that.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, obviously we haven’t seen the details of the announcement from the company, but we’ll obviously -- or the early indications are that this is good news.  And obviously we’d welcome that good news.

I know that the President-elect has indicated that he deserves credit for that announcement.  And I guess what I would observe is that if he is successful in doing that 804 more times, then he will meet the record of manufacturing jobs that were created in the United States while President Obama was in office.  There were 805,000 manufacturing jobs that weren’t just protected or saved, but actually created while President Obama was in office.

So President Obama has set a high standard, and President-elect Trump can meet that standard if this Carrier deal is completed in the way that he expects that it will be.  If he does that 804 more times, then he will have matched the standard established by President Obama -- at least when it comes to manufacturing jobs.  The one difference would be that the President-elect is talking about protecting jobs, and the metric I’m using is actually creating jobs.

If you go to protecting jobs, there are more than a million jobs in the industrial Midwest that were saved when President Obama made the decision to rescue the American auto industry.  And the long-term benefits of that fateful decision that was not initially popular has yielded a substantial benefit for the entire country, but certainly for the industrial Midwest.

Q    But are there any thoughts on kind of like a personal intervention, the use of the bully pulpit maybe to kind of protect American jobs or keep companies from moving overseas?  I mean, was there -- I guess, is there any position on whether that's a good use of the authority of the presidency?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think when it comes to the announcement from Carrier, we’ll wait to see the details.  But the indications are that it’s good news.  And we’d welcome that.

As it relates to the governing strategy, I think it remains to be seen whether or not that’s one that can be applied to other situations.  Again, the President-elect will certainly have an opportunity to lay out his strategy when it comes to the economy.  But he’s indicated that he intends to pursue a different economic strategy than this administration pursued.  And we’ll all have an opportunity to evaluate whether or not that's likely to meet the rather high bar that's been established by the strategy put forward by President Obama.

Q    On another topic, the U.N. Security Council has imposed new sanctions on North Korea on Wednesday.  I was wondering, how do these sanctions -- or is there hope that these sanctions will have an impact where other sanctions have not?  How do these maybe differ?  And would they be able to bring about some type of change in the North Korean regime?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ayesha, this U.N. Security Council resolution represents weeks of hard-nosed diplomacy.  In order to pass a U.N. Security Council resolution, it requires not just the approval of the United States and some of our European allies, it also includes -- or requires not just the consent but the cooperation of both Russia and China.  Those are two countries with whom the United States has on occasion -- and as it relates to some issues -- a rather complicated relationship.

But in this case, we have succeeded in brokering a diplomatic agreement among every member of the U.N. Security Council to put forward a tough new resolution that will apply additional pressure to the North Korean regime.

There are a couple of things that I can cite for you, and for more details I’d refer you to my colleagues in Ambassador Powers’ office.

But the first thing -- and I think this is the most notable one -- is that this resolution will impose a hard, binding cap on North Korea’s coal exports.  Coal exports are North Korea’s largest source of external revenue.  And we know that a significant portion of that revenue is plowed into their nuclear program.  So putting in place this hard cap and closing loopholes that they've previously exploited to get around previous sanctions is a substantial development.

The resolution also strengthens and expands a range of sectoral sanctions on other exports from the DPRK.  And these are exports, aside from coal, that the North Koreans use to raise hard currency.  And when you're the subject of so many sanctions like the North Koreans are, raising that hard currency is difficult to do.  We've made it even harder and applied even more economic pressure in those areas where we know that the North Koreans are using revenue to fund their nuclear program.

And I think this does send a clear signal about the resolve -- not just of the United States and South Korea and Japan -- but rather of countries around the world to compelling the North Korean government to come into compliance with their international obligations as it relates to their nuclear program.

Michelle.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  So do you think that these new sanctions have a much greater likelihood of changing North Korean behavior?  I mean, where do they rank in terms of past sanctions?  I know you explained the cap and the revenue streams, but what do you think in terms of this working?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, it certainly ratchets up pressure on the North Korean government in a way that they have not experienced before.  This will put real pressure on the North Korean government to evaluate the strategy that they have pursued.

I don’t think anybody outside of the North Korean government can predict exactly whether or not this will lead to the kind of change in their behavior that we’d like to see.  But we do know that this will increase the pressure and it will make things more difficult for the North Korean government, both in terms of leading that country, but also in terms of investing in their nuclear program.  It will deepen their isolation, and it makes clear that it’s getting harder and harder for them to extract much sympathy from other countries in the region.

This is a pretty united front.  This is a united front that is being presented by the international community, including the Russians and the Chinese, about the need for the North Koreans to change their behavior.  Will they actually do it?  Time will tell.

Q    These are based on past sanctions and behavior continuing.  If these new sanctions don’t change behavior, is their still room for additional sanctions?  Is that going to be the pattern for the indefinite future, do you think?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, hopefully that won’t be the pattern because hopefully this will apply the necessary pressure to get them to change their behavior.  We’ll see.  But there always is an opportunity for us to go farther.

But we’re not putting sanctions in place as a punitive measure.  We’re not putting sanctions in place just for the sake of putting in place sanctions.  We’re putting in place sanctions with the hope that it will bring about a change in behavior for the North Korean government, and a possibility for the international community to more deeply and constructively engage the North Korean regime -- bring them out of the shadows, bring them into the international community, and actually bring relief to the millions of people in North Korea who live under an oppressive regime in extraordinarily harsh condition.

Q    But there’s going to be a point at which there’s not going to be much more you can do in the way of sanctions, right?  Are we reaching that point now?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think that this certainly represents a substantial escalation in pressure on the North Korean regime, and hopefully it will lead to the kind of changes that we’d like to see.

Is there room to go further?  I’m sure there always is.  But hopefully that won’t be necessary, and hopefully we’ll see a change from the North Koreans that will address the significant concerns harbored around the world about North Korea’s provocations and their willingness to shirk their international -- their responsibilities when it comes to developing a nuclear program.

Q    Okay.  And on this Carrier deal, sources are saying now that it wasn’t the promise of incentives from the state to keep some of these jobs here, but it was the threat of a 35 percent tariff on Carrier’s products.  What do you think of that?  And is that something that President Obama would have done in his attempts to build manufacturing jobs?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I’ll let the President-elect’s team describe what kind of strategy they are going to choose to implement.  I think it’s been quite clear the strategy that President Obama has sought to implement, and one of those strategies was actually predicated on successfully renegotiating NAFTA to level the playing field for American workers and American businesses so that the American economy could enjoy substantial benefits.

And threats of levying additional tariffs is not a tactic that this administration chose to pursue, but we may have an opportunity to test the theory that’s been put forward by the President-elect about whether or not that is a smart, sustainable strategy.

Chris.

Q    Josh, the Defense Authorization bill that the Republican lawmakers have agreed to omits the controversial language that would have undermined President Obama’s executive order barring anti-LGBT discrimination on federal contractors.  Do Republicans (inaudible) for leaving out that provision?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I can tell you is that, as of just a few minutes ago, we had actually not seen the final text of the bill yet.

Typically, the bill is hundreds of pages long, and it takes some time to review the text of the bill and determine exactly what the consequences are of those measures.  So I can't make a grand pronouncement at this point about our position on the legislation.  What we have been told is the so-called Russell Amendment is not in that legislation.  We'll obviously take a look to see -- to confirm that.  But no, I don't think you get credit for deciding not to discriminate against somebody.  I think that is behavior that we would expect of everybody in the country, particularly people who are elected to represent their fellow citizens in the United States Congress.

Q    Assuming that is correct that it's not in the bill, to what extent is that an empty victory, considering that Republicans could just do that again next Congress without a veto threat, or President Trump could just dismantle the executive order on his own volition?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I'm not going to speculate about what may happen after President Obama leaves office.  Obviously the Republican-led Congress and the Republican President will have to determine what kind of policies they want to pursue.  But we obviously have spent a lot of time over the course of this year talking about the fact that elections have consequences.  And it's possible that this is one way in which elections would have consequences.

Q    Do you expect the President will sign the NDAA?

MR. EARNEST:  Again, we haven't seen the text of it, but we'll obviously review it.  That may take a little time.  But once we've reached a conclusion about whether or not the President will sign it, we'll let you know.

Scott.

Q    Josh, the President has been a big promoter of loan forgiveness plans for college students that tie their payments to their income.  GAO has got a report out today saying that's going to be more costly than advertised; it also criticized the way that the Education Department counts for it.  Any reaction to that?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven't seen the actual report.  I can tell you the President has placed a priority on making sure that graduating students are treated fairly by the Department of Education and by lenders when it comes to their student loans.  One idea that this administration has pioneered is the idea of income-based repayment, which essentially allows students or recent graduates to cap their loan repayments every month at 10 percent of their income.  This is a way that we can ensure that graduates are fulfilling their basic responsibility to repay the government for the money that they've borrowed.  But we want to make sure that when students graduate, that they're not saddled with so much debt that they're essentially penalized financially for pursuing college education opportunities.

So the strategy that we've put forward has benefitted thousands of students across the country.  There are many thousands more that have not availed themselves of the opportunity that is part of the income-based repayment program.  And so certainly if there are students or recent graduates out there that are struggling to repay their loans, we would encourage them to contact the Department of Education and learn more about income-based repayment.  And we can probably, in many cases, design a strategy that allows you to keep your commitment to the government, to the American people, for the money that you've borrowed, and to get a college education, but we can do that in a way that doesn't pose an undue financial hardship as you go and try to get started on a career.

Gardiner.

Q    Elizabeth Warren came out today and blasted the 21st Century Cures Act, saying it's a giveaway to industry, that it's corruption at its worst.  The administration has been supportive of the 21st Century Cures Act before.  Where are you now on the bill?

MR. EARNEST:  Gardiner, just last night we issued a detailed statement of administration policy that sort of walks through a lot of the details.  So I'd refer you to that particular statement.  But, in general, what I can tell you is that the legislation includes important funding for things like the President’s BRAIN Initiative that would turbo-charge the amount of research that's done into the human brain.  It would dedicate significant funding streams to the Vice President’s Cancer Moonshot initiative, and would augment the government’s ability to organize research and focus it on those projects that are likely to lead to the kind of breakthroughs that could save lives.

The money also -- or the bill also includes funding for offering assistance to those who are addicted to heroin and opioids.  This is the epidemic of addiction that we've seen all across the country as plaguing far too many communities and families.  And there has been a deficit of resources dedicated to making sure that those people who are trying to get help for their addiction can get it.

And so as with any piece of legislation that is passed by a Republican Congress and signed into law by a Democratic President, it's going to require some compromise.  There are some elements of the bill that the administration doesn't support.  I'm confident that there are some parts of the bill that some Republicans don't support either.  But at the end of day, I think the bill will get overall support from Democrats and Republicans because of some of the priorities that I've identified.

John.

Q    I wanted to ask a quick follow-up on Leader Pelosi.  Did the President go out and try to whip up any votes for her, or make any phone calls on her behalf?

MR. EARNEST:  The President was not involved in the leadership race among House Democrats.  The President, as he has done in previous contested party races in Congress, has essentially said that it's their responsibility to make that decision.  And I think everyone is keenly aware of his warm feelings for Leader Pelosi, but ultimately it's the responsibility of House Democrats to make the decision about who should lead them.

Q    I also wanted to ask you about any White House reaction, or reaction from the President, on the district attorney’s decision down in North Carolina to not pursue any sort of charges.  He said that the officer who killed Keith Scott acted lawfully.  I was wondering if there was any sort of reaction to that.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, as we've discussed in other settings, John, the White House is not going to get involved in handicapping or second-guessing criminal investigations.  As this investigation was opened by the local district attorney, there were statements from the Department of Justice indicating that they were going to monitor the situation in Charlotte, and so I certainly don't want to say anything that could be viewed as prejudging or getting ahead of any sort of decision that they may announce.

But I'm confident that my colleagues at the Department of Justice are aware of this announcement, have followed through on their commitment to continue to monitor the situation.  But for any reaction, I'd refer you to them.

Q    So DOJ’s decision will be completely independent of DA account?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the Department of Justice’s decision will be independent of any sort of personal feelings that the President of the United States may have about the decision made by the district attorney.  What impact the district attorney’s decision has on the Department of Justice is something you should ask the Department of Justice.

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  I wanted to ask you about the wildfires in Tennessee.  Three people have died; more than 150 homes and businesses have been destroyed by the wildfires.  Can you give us an update on what the administration is doing to help the folks in the state?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, obviously our thoughts and prayers are with the people of Tennessee who are dealing with a very difficult situation right now.  The wildfire in that part of the country is a very serious situation and there are lives that have been lost.  Less importantly, there’s been property that's been lost as well.  And obviously the thoughts and prayers of the entire country are with that community that has been so negatively affected by the situation there.

There are a couple of steps that the federal government has taken to provide support to local officials who are dealing with this situation.  The first is, my colleagues at FEMA have provided a Fire Management Assistance Grant -- an FMAG -- to local officials to provide them some additional resources to deal with that situation.  There also are a couple of teams of firefighting experts that have been deployed.  These are experts that serve in a variety of federal agencies.  Some of them are actually employed by state agencies, but they work effectively with federal partners and are actually being deployed to Tennessee to help officials there develop a strategy to make sure that -- to try to contain the fire as quickly as possible before more lives are lost and before more property is lost.

I understand that there was some rainfall overnight, which hopefully will have at least some positive impact.  But I also understand that that rainfall was accompanied by some rather high winds.  So we're hoping that the weather will continue to contribute positively to extinguishing this fire as soon as possible.  But obviously this is a very serious situation.  And significant resources have been mobilized by the federal government to offer our assistance to state and local officials who are dealing with it firsthand.

Q    Does this warrant a federal disaster declaration?  And has the President personally been in contact with the government?

MR. EARNEST:  The President has been briefed on the situation.  I don't know that he’s spoken to the governor.  As it relates to the kind of federal assistance that we can provide, the financial assistance through an FMAG and the technical assistance through the team of experts that I have made reference to earlier are the most immediate, urgent way for the federal government to offer any assistance.

But down the line, I wouldn’t necessarily rule out the eventual declaration of an emergency.  But we’ll have to exactly take a look at the scope of the damage and make a determination from there.

Q    I want to draw your attention to something that's happening in Syria.  It has been reported that Israeli jets have executed some airstrikes in the area.  I’m curious -- has the U.S. military, to your knowledge, been in contact with the Russians in terms of de-confliction in the airspace over Syria, or with the Israelis as that area continues to suffer from numerous airstrikes?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, as it relates to Israeli military action and reports of their military action, I’d refer you to the Israeli government.  I won’t have any comment on that.

As it relates to the U.S. military action inside of Syria, there is a sustained air campaign being waged by U.S. military pilots against ISIL targets in Syria.  And that bombing campaign has resulted in senior ISIL officials -- including some who are responsible for external plotting -- being taken off the battlefield in the last few months.  So we've applied substantial pressure to ISIL targets through a robust U.S. military bombing campaign.  And there is a low-level channel that's been established with the Russians to ensure that we can successfully de-conflict our military efforts with any efforts that the Russians may have ongoing.

That is different than, and stops short of, cooperating or coordinating with them militarily.  But we are in contact enough to make sure that our military pilots can operate free of any interference by Russians who also may be engaged in military activities in the region.

Q    Lastly, I want to ask you a domestic question.  And this is a little bit of a hypothetical, but maybe you can be instructive on it.  As it relates to sanctuary cities, there has been some suggestion that the federal government could apply pressure on so-called sanctuary cities if they fail to comply with the law.  That's been talked about at length as a possibility under a Trump administration.

Broadly speaking from the Obama administration perspective, is that a good use of the federal government’s cudgel, if you will, to get the cities to follow the law as it relates to immigration or any other?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think, Kevin, the fact that we're even having a discussion about sanctuary cities is an indication of just how broken our immigration system is.  And this is a good example of why President Obama fought so hard to try to reform our broken immigration system.  And he did succeed in working with Democrats and Republicans in the Senate to put forward a common-sense bill that would have made a historic investment in border security, but also made some common-sense reforms to our immigration system that would have ensured that people who have been in the United States for a substantial period of time are essentially given an opportunity to come out of the shadows.

Now, they are in some cases asked to pay a fine.  They got to pay taxes.  They got to go through a background check.  There are onerous obstacles that have to be overcome.  But yet there is a path to resolving this situation.

And failing to act on comprehensive immigration reform -- something that had bipartisan support not just in Washington, D.C. but all across the country -- there is a reason that law enforcement organizations, faith-based communities, the business community are all strongly supportive of comprehensive immigration reform.  They understand the benefits that are possible, and they understand that the current system we have is broken.

And the fact that there is a discussion about sanctuary cities is just one symptom of a much more significant affliction that continues to plague this country.  And this is a problem that would have been solved had Republicans in the House of Representatives not blocked or prevented a vote on this bipartisan bill that had passed the Senate.

Q    Even if I were to cede that -- and I think there’s a lot there that I think most people would certainly agree with you on -- isn’t it the responsibility of these cities and communities to still follow the law?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, the President has made clear that when it comes to our immigration policy, it’s important for federal law to reflect that we are a nation of laws, but we're also a nation of immigrants.  And it shouldn’t be that hard.  In fact, it’s not that hard to reconcile those two important priorities.  And the bipartisan legislation that advanced through the Senate with the strong support of the administration certainly did effectively balance those two priorities.

But the failure to balance those priorities in our federal law has a number of difficult consequences.  And again, the fact that we have to talk about sanctuary cities I think is one example of that.

Q    Last one.  On OPEC apparently cutting production, is the White House aware of this?  And is there a concern here that that will have a major impact on, broadly, gas prices in particular for American citizens?

MR. EARNEST:  I’ve seen that news report.  I’m not aware of any specific briefing that the U.S. government has received on that vote.  I know there have been previous occasions where there have been statements submitted by OPEC that didn't actually result in the policy change that they said that they were pursuing.  So we’ll obviously watch and see what impact this statement has.

Philip.

Q    Thank you.  On the funeral of Fidel Castro in Cuba this weekend, it’s a relatively long affair.  So I’m wondering whether at some point the President is expected to watch parts of the funeral.  And will he be updated regularly by Ben Rhodes, who is there for the funeral?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't anticipate that the President will watch any of the proceedings on television.  Mr. Rhodes and our diplomat in Cuba, Ambassador DeLaurentis, participated in a memorial service last night.  But I'm not aware that either of them intends to be a part of all of the activities over the next three days.  The two of them were in attendance last night representing the United States.

But Mr. Rhodes remains in Cuba today because he's been -- he had previously planned to travel to Cuba this week to have meetings with government officials and officials at the U.S. embassy to discuss the continued effort to implement a policy of normalizing relations between our two countries.  But the last I heard is that he's actually planning to come back tonight.  So I don't think that -- I know that he won't be there and participating in the events that are planned over the next several days.

Q    Any details by any chance of who exactly those meetings were with and what they might have been about?

MR. EARNEST:  Not at this point, but when he gets back we'll see if we can get you a readout of his engagements while he was there.

Q    The phone calls between the President-elect and the President -- you gave some details yesterday and said that, I believe all the phone calls or most of them emanated from the President-elect's office.  Have there been any cases where a call has been initiated here at the White House and went to Donald Trump, to the President-elect, from here?

MR. EARNEST:  My understanding -- and again, I can't account for all of their conversations, but my understanding at least of the phone calls that have been discussed publically, those were calls that were initiated by the President-elect.

Q    Do you expect that to even itself out a little bit from now until the inauguration?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't know.  We'll have to see.  But I can't guarantee that we'll be talking about those conversations publically.

Jordan.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Senate Majority Leader McConnell said today that the Senate is going to vote on the Iran Sanctions Act this week and that's expected to pass.  And I'm wondering whether President Obama would veto that bill if it reached his desk.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jordan, as we have said on a number of occasions, the administration continues to retain substantial authorities that can be used to impose financial sanctions on the Iranian regime.  There are a variety of reasons why we would want to do that.

The first is, we've seen the Iranians on a number of occasions take steps with regard to their ballistic missile program that are inconsistent with U.N. Security Council resolutions.  We have seen direct evidence of the Iranians sponsoring terrorism.  We have seen ample evidence that the Iranians aren't living up to generally accepted norms when it comes to protecting the basic universal human rights of the Iranian people.

All those are reasons that Iran could be subject to financial sanctions -- and they have been.  These are financial sanctions imposed by the Obama administration against the Iranian government and other Iranian entities because of our concerns about those areas.  So we retain substantial authority to impose additional sanctions if they are warranted.

We know that there is a renewed interest -- or there is interest in Congress in giving the administration additional authority.  We'll take a look at what bill is passed and determine whether or not the President will sign it.  But for those in Congress who are interested in making sure the administration has sufficient authority, I can confirm that we do, and I can confirm that we have not been shy about using it.

Q    It sounds like you think this legislation is unnecessary.  Is that correct?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, there are plenty of times where the President has signed into law bills that Congress has passed that we're not sure are entirely necessary.  So I would avoid reading in too much -- reading too much into my comments about whether or not the President will sign it.  We'll see what Congress passes, if they pass something.  And we'll let you know if the President intends to sign it.

Jean.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  Today, a U.N. Security Council resolution adopted new sanctions against North Korea.  What is the difference between the (inaudible) and the new sanctions on North Korea?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jean, as I mentioned earlier, the most substantial difference is the new sanctions regime includes a hard, binding cap on North Korean coal exports.  This is significant because we know that North Korea gets more revenue from their coal exports than anywhere else, and we know they use a substantial portion of that revenue to fund their nuclear program.  So putting in place this hard, binding cap is going to limit their ability to do that.

There are other sectors of the economy that will also face tougher penalties and tougher sanctions.  And again, we know that’s important because those sectoral sanctions are related to exports and we know that exports are the best way for the North Korean regime to get access to hard currency.  We know a lot of that hard currency is then used to invest in their nuclear program.

So there are some other steps that relate to preventing the North Koreans from generating revenue by using their real property holdings overseas.  There are additional prohibitions that are put in place on public and private support for trade with the North Korean government.

So for a more detailed run-down on how all this would work, I’d refer you to my colleagues in the office of Ambassador Power, who has obviously done remarkable work to organize the international community around this set of sanctions that actually represents a substantial escalation in the pressure that’s being applied against North Korea because of their nuclear program.

Q    What if China rejects this?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m sorry?

Q    Do you think Chinese will agree to this?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, our expectation is that the Chinese will agree to this.  The Chinese obviously have a veto power at the U.N. Security Council.  And based on this difficult, weeks-long negotiation with the members of the Security Council, the indication is that the Chinese government is prepared to support a resolution like what I’ve just described -- which is a good thing, an important step, and is an indication that the international community is presenting a united front in confronting North Korea for their nuclear program.

Q    One more question.  Japan and South Korea, China will hold a trilateral summit meeting at Tokyo next month.  What is your comment on that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, what we have often said is that we believe the United States benefits from our allies having a constructive, productive relationship with China.  After all, President Obama meets with his Chinese counterpart with some regularity; he just did it a couple of weeks ago when we were in Peru.

So we obviously would welcome both greater cooperation between our South Korean and Japanese allies on a range of issues.  And if they can cooperate in terms of strengthening and improving their relationship with China -- making it more productive and constructive -- there’s nothing wrong with that at all from the standpoint of the United States.

Q    Does U.S. agree with the South Korea and Japan military security agreement?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, we certainly have encouraged our allies in South Korea and Japan to intensify their efforts to coordinate on a range of issues, including on a range of security issues.  Again, we believe that that will enhance the national security of our two allies, and we believe that that’s a good thing for the United States.

So the United States, including President Obama himself, has played a central role in trying to facilitate warmer, more effective relations between two of our most important allies in Asia.  And we’ve obviously seen South Korea and Japan make some really important strides in terms of improving their relationship and having more effective coordination on a range of issues including a range of national security issues, and that’s something that we have long encouraged them to do.

John.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  Has the administration’s effort to transfer detainees at the prison facility at Guantanamo ceased since the election -- the presidential election three weeks ago?

MR. EARNEST:  No.

Q    And what are the plans, as it relates to the remaining detainees at Guantanamo, from this point forward, leading up to Inauguration Day?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, we’re going to continue to do the difficult, diplomatic spade work that’s necessary to transfer as many of those detainees as possible that have been cleared for transfer by the national security experts who are viewing their case files.

Those transfers obviously are contingent on a range of security requirements that ensure that those individuals can't pose an undue threat to U.S. national security after they’re transferred.  That's the reason it requires a bit of diplomacy to ask other countries to assume this responsibility.  But there are dozens of Gitmo detainees that have been cleared for transfer by national security experts that have reviewed their files, and we just need to do the diplomatic work that's necessary to find an appropriate place to send them.

Q    As you know, President-elect Trump has spoken often about how he would like to keep the prison facility at Guantanamo open when he becomes President.  Has the administration consulted with the Trump transition team in any way about plans to transfer any detainees from Guantanamo to third countries?

MR. EARNEST:  I can't speak to any specific conversations.  I can tell you that there are individuals who have been designated by the President-elect to serve as the lead of his transition team both as it relates to the National Security Council, but also other agencies that do work on the prison at Guantanamo Bay, including at the Department of Defense and the Department of State.

I would certainly assume that some of those conversations have included a discussion about the prison at Guantanamo Bay and helping them understand the policy that we have pursued.  And it's a policy that we will pursue until January 20th, as long as President Obama remains President of the United States.

Q    So the administration feels then a need to consult with the Trump transition team about any plans that it may have to transfer detainees from Guantanamo?

MR. EARNEST:  I think, John, what I'm trying to say is I'm not going the get into the specific details of their conversations.  I can tell you that senior officials at the Department of State, at the Department of Defense and at the National Security Council are committed to what the President has made a top priority, which is a smooth and effective transition to the next presidency.  That's going to include a detail discussion of complicated issues that those agencies are dealing with.

So, to the extent that we want the incoming team to have a good understanding of what our policy has been with regard to the prison at Guantanamo Bay, understand the steps that we're taking to review the case files of individual detainees, to understand the steps that we take to negotiate with other countries to understand what sort of security requirements we insist on when those prisoners are -- those detainees are transferred -- that's a good thing and that will ensure a smooth and effective transition.  But this is a policy that will remain in place until President Obama leaves office on January 20th.  After that and what policy will be in place after that is something that the President-elect and his team will have to work out.

Q    One final thing on this.  There is only one President at a time.  There is only one Commander-in-Chief at a time.  Does what you're saying, Josh, does it mean that the Trump transition team has no essentially veto authority on any detainees that could be transferred to third countries?

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, of course not, they don't.  The decision that’s made to transfer individuals is based on a review of their case file by national security experts at a variety of national security agencies, including the intelligence community, the Department of Defense and others.  Once they have reached a determination that a detainee is eligible for transfer, then the Department of State goes to work in trying to do some diplomacy with another country to get them to accept the transfer of this detainee under a set of security requirements that limit the ability of that detainee to pose any risk to the United States or our interests or our allies.

So that's difficult work, but that's work that we've been doing for almost eight years now and that's work that will continue at least through January 20th.  After that, the President-elect’s team will have to decide how they want to handle that situation.

Mark.

Q    Josh, have the Obamas bought a home in Rancho Mirage?

MR. EARNEST:  I know there’s been some reporting speculating that they were considering doing that.  I don't have any updates on any real estate transactions.  Obviously the First Family still owns a home on the South Side of Chicago, and we have publicly discussed their intent to remain in Washington for a couple of years after President Obama leaves the White House,  and they’ll be renting a home here in the Washington area.  But for any transactions beyond that, I can't confirm those reports.

Q    Or Hawaii?

MR. EARNEST:  Obviously the President has great affection for Hawaii, but I'm not aware of any real estate transactions that he’s made there at this point.

Q    How many receptions are the Obamas hosting in this final cycle, do you know?

MR. EARNEST:  For the holiday season?  Many.  I don't have the exact count, but we can look that up for you.  The First Lady’s office has been doing the work of organizing many of these activities, but we'll see if we can contact them on your behalf and get you an answer.

JC.

Q    Speaking of executive residences, the First Lady has often described the rigors of living here at the White House as kind of living above the store.  Obviously there are advantages of the President living in this particular executive mansion.  It seems that Mr. Trump may become sort of -- or his family certainly a part-time resident of the White House.  What are the thoughts of this administration, especially when it comes to the national security areas, being close to the Situation Room, literally within minutes, that Mr. Trump may somehow be a bi-city resident -- or his family certainly will be?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, obviously the President-elect and his family will have to determine what sort of living arrangement makes the most sense for them.  And that's obviously not something I'm going to second-guess.  We've made clear that when President Obama is traveling, he essentially takes the inner workings of the White House with him so that he can execute all of the duties that he has as President of the United States.  And he's able to do that from aboard an aircraft and he's able to do that from overseas when he's traveling.

So I certainly wouldn't anticipate that the President-elect would encounter any difficult in trying to do that from New York City.  But, look --

Q    But if he’s --

MR. EARNEST:  Well, look, as far as I can tell, he has for a number of years enjoyed the benefits of living above the store in Trump Tower, and so maybe he would appreciate the benefits of living above the store here in Washington, too.  But ultimately, that will be for him and his family to decide, and I wouldn't second-guess or criticize that decision one way or the other.

Tara.

Q    I have a question about Guantanamo.  I understand that transfers will still take place and they're still being planned -- the transfers of detainees out of Guantanamo.  But I'm wondering about the briefings that you're having for the incoming members, like Mike Pompeo, who is from Kansas.  I know there was some history of him in Guantanamo, and I wondered if you had talked to him in the past about maybe the possibility of moving detainees to Kansas or how you might build on that.

MR. EARNEST:  I can't speak to what sort of conversations may have occurred with Congressman Pompeo.  He obviously is somebody that has -- I believe he served on the House Intelligence Committee, so he is conversed in many of these issues.  So I'm confident he's had some discussions with senior administration officials about our approach to a range of these national security issues, including our efforts to close the prison at Guantanamo Bay.  But I can't speak to the details of any of those discussions.

Q    -- spoke with him, did you, about, like, anything related to Kansas or the transfers?  You didn't know him from before?

MR. EARNEST:  Me, personally?  No, I've never had the pleasure of meeting Congressman Pompeo.

I'll give this gentleman in the back the last question.

Q    I wanted to ask about the Nobel Prize award meeting this afternoon.  I was wondering if you could comment on how well the President feels that he has lived up to his own award -- the Nobel Peace Prize that he was awarded seven years ago, over the last seven years.

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I think that's an excellent question, one I'm sure the President can answer better than I can.  What --

Q    -- come out --

MR. EARNEST:  Well, we'll see.  (Laughter.)  The one thing I guess I would encourage those who are interested in this question to do is to go back and look at the speech that the President delivered in December of 2009 -- maybe you've done this -- in which the President talked about what his approach to being the President of the United States would be and how that was consistent with the aspirations that were represented by the committee's decision to award him the Nobel Prize.

And I feel confident in telling you that the President feels that he's lived up to the standard that he has set for himself in that speech.  He acknowledged that his first responsibility and his first duty as President of the United States is to protect the American people.  And in some cases, that has required him ordering the United States military to kill people who are trying to kill Americans.  What the President has also tried to do is to use other elements of American power to advance our values and our interests around the world.  And that's something that a U.S. President is uniquely positioned to do.

And many of you who have had an opportunity to cover President Obama as he's traveled around the world, have seen that he’s spent time in intensive discussions with other world leaders about military campaigns.  He’s taken advantage of the opportunity to thank our men and women in uniform for their service in protecting this country when they're deployed at bases overseas, in many cases far away from their families and loved ones.  He’s had an opportunity to thank them firsthand for their willingness to put their lives in harm’s way to protect America.

But the President has also spent a lot of time meeting with opposition figures in other countries, meeting with activists in other countries who fighting for greater freedom and liberty.  The President has met with entrepreneurs in other countries -- people who are seeking to build a stronger economy and a better life for them and their family in a way that contributes to their community and for their country.

All of that is consistent with the basic responsibilities of the President of the United States, consistent with the kinds of values that we cherish in this country, and in the President’s mind, consistent with the aspirations that were exhibited by the committee when they decided to award him the Nobel Prize in the first place.

So many people made the observation in 2009 that President Obama hadn’t earned the Nobel Prize.  And I don't think anybody saw a particularly aggressive argument from the President at that time.  But people will have an opportunity now, after almost eight years that the President has served in office, to evaluate whether or not, based on his record of protecting the American people and advancing our interests around the globe, whether or not he’s lived up to the aspirations of the Nobel committee.  And the President is quite proud of his record.

Thanks, everybody.  We’ll see you tomorrow.   And maybe even later tonight.

END
1:17 P.M. EST
12:15 P.M. EST

MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  I don’t actually have any announcements at the top, but --

Q    Thank you.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  But because today marks my last briefing, I hope you’ll indulge me a couple of personal thoughts before I go to your questions.

As I prepared to stand here at this podium for the last time, I thought a lot about the first time.  It was 16 years ago this week.  It was January, 2001.  I had just moved to Washington, D.C., and I got on a West Wing tour with a friend of a friend.  We walked through the halls of the West Wing on that tour.  We saw tired White House staffers lugging boxes of their personal belongings out of the building, much the way that people who are on West Wing tours today see.  And on the tour, I smiled for a photo that a friend took of me standing behind this very podium.

I had been in D.C. for a grand total of two weeks.  I had no contacts.  I had no job prospects.  I had no relevant Washington experience.  I was sleeping on the floor of a college buddy’s apartment that had a spare bedroom -- and by spare, I don’t just mean it was an extra bedroom; it was an empty bedroom containing only the items that I had managed to load into my car when I moved here from Texas.

So it’s fair to say that there weren’t too many other people on the tour that night who thought I would stand here in front of you as something other than a tourist.  So it’s been an extraordinary journey, and this has been an extraordinary chapter.

This is the 354th White House daily briefing that I have led as the Press Secretary -- Mark can check me on that number.  (Laughter.)  Not every briefing started exactly on time.  (Laughter.)  There might have been a briefing or two that went a little longer than you would have preferred.  But you had to admit there was a lot to discuss.  We had plenty of shameless plugs for the Kansas City Royals to squeeze in.  (Laughter.)  There was, of course, the Freedom Caucus’s infamous Tortilla Coast gambit.  There was Congressman Steve Scalise who reportedly compared himself favorably to David Duke.  There was the reintroduction of the word “snafu” into the political lexicon as we were working to pass TPA.

We discussed at length the various ways you can catch Zika, the various ways you can catch Ebola, and the various reasons scientists recommend you vaccinate your kids so that you don’t catch the measles.  Jon Stewart lit me up as I struggled to explain to Jon Karl why a couple of our political ambassadors for some reason had no idea what they were doing.  (Laughter.)  At least the Stewart segment made some of my friends laugh.

President-elect Trump, of course, took advantage of the opportunity to light me up as a “foolish guy” who makes even the good news sound bad.  (Laughter.)  And I have to admit that even that one made me laugh.  (Laughter.)

But it wasn’t always fun and games around here.  There was the time that I tangled with Senator Schumer about DHS funding for New York City, and the time that I tangled with Senator Schumer over the Iran deal -- (laughter) -- and the time that I tangled with Senator Schumer over the JASTA legislation,  and the time I tangled with Senator Schumer over the wisdom of passing Obamacare, and the time I tangled with Senator Schumer over Trade Promotion Authority legislation.  And to think, we actually spent most of the last two and a half years complaining about how unreasonable Republicans in Congress are.  (Laughter.)

The daily briefing, of course, is the most high-profile part of the press secretary’s job, but it’s not the only part that matters.  The more important part, in many ways, is working with all of you and ensuring the freedom of the press that keeps this democracy vital.

When I first entered this role, I worked closely with the White House Travel Office and the Department of Defense to reform the billing process for your flights on military aircraft, including Air Force One, making those bills more transparent and smaller.  In the last two and a half years, we’ve cajoled governments in China, Ethiopia, and Cuba to host news conferences on their soil, allowing the leaders of those countries and their citizens to see firsthand what it means for independent journalists to hold those in power accountable.

Of course, it was the end-of-the-year news conference that the President convened in this room in 2014 that got as much attention as any other because President Obama called on eight journalists, all women.

And finally, everything about this final week makes me think of all the incredible people whom I’ve been blessed to work with these past eight years.  I only have this opportunity because Robert Gibbs pulled me aside on Election Night 2008 in Chicago as the returns were coming in to tell me that he wanted me to come work with him at the White House.  I’m only here because Jay Carney, Jennifer Palmieri and Dan Pfeiffer supported and encouraged me when I was the deputy, and advocated for me when Jay stepped down.

I’ve also benefitted from a kitchen cabinet of senior White House officials, who’ve got a lot of other important responsibilities that are part of their formal job description, but stepped in to help me out every time I asked for it.  And that’s people like Denis McDonough and Susan Rice and Jennifer Psaki, Liz Allen, Jesse Lee, Cody Keenan, and, of course, Ben Rhodes.  And I’ve only been able to do this job because I have an incredible team around me.

My assistants over the years, Jeff Tiller, Antoinette Rangel, and now Desiree Barnes all patiently supported a guy who, let’s face it, sometimes isn’t so easy to assist.  The White House stenographers -- Dominique Dansky Bari, Beck Dorey-Stein, Amy Sands, Mike McCormick, Caitlin Young, and their tireless leader, Peggy Suntum -- they work as hard as anybody at the White House and complain about it less than anybody at the White House.  (Applause.)

Applause is appropriate at that point.  (Applause.)  I think the only team that may contend with them might be the research department here at the White House that’s led by Alex Platkin and Kristen Bartoloni.  But I hope you’ll get a chance over the course of the next week to thank the stenographers for their important work, because I know they make your lives a lot easier, too.

The same goes for Peter Velz, Brian Gabriel and Sarah Rutherford, who are stretched as thin, and who are at least as effective as any team of press wranglers we’ve ever had here at the White House.  My colleagues at the NSC, including Ned Price, Emily Horne, Mark Stroh, Carl Woog, and Dew Tiantawach patiently explained to me things that I didn’t know so that I could, in turn, explain them to you.

My team in lower press -- Patrick Rodenbush, Katie Hill and Brandi Hoffine -- is as talented and as dedicated as any press team in this town.  I begged Brandi to join this team when I first got this job, and her performance has far exceeded the sky-high recommendations I got from people all over town after I interviewed her.  They are all -- Katie, Brandi and Patrick -- as they say, going places.

Eric Schultz is simply the best deputy that anyone in any field could ask for.  He shows up early, he stays late.  He’s deft -- that’s an inside joke.  (Laughter.)  He’s always prepared.  He’s unfailingly loyal.  His judgment is sought after throughout the halls of the White House, not just by me, but by various members of the senior staff and I’m sure will be sought after in his bright post-White House future, too.  Including by me.

When you're President of the United States and widely regarded as among the most thoughtful and eloquent speakers on the planet, it must be hard to watch someone go on TV and speak for you.  I suspect that's why, when the President offered me this job, he said he wouldn’t watch my briefings.  (Laughter.) But I know that he saw parts of them on those very rare occasions that he watched cable TV.  And he never second-guessed me.  Not once.  He didn't just give me the opportunity of a lifetime, he had my back every single day.  And I’m grateful for it.

But there is one person who contributed to my success more than anyone else, and she doesn't even work at the White House.  My wife, Natalie, was six months pregnant with our first child when I got this job.  She was home with the air-conditioning repairman when the President of the United States called me into the Oval Office to offer me the job.  When I got back to my desk, I saw that I had several missed calls on my cellphone from her.  I quickly called her back.  I told her that I was sorry that I missed her calls, but that I had the best possible excuse for missing them.

Since then she has extended to me more support and understanding than I could ever ask for, even as she was becoming the best mom any two-year-old kid could hope for.  When I missed the mark up here, she didn't hesitate to tell me about it.  And when I got it right the next day, it was usually because I followed her advice.

So, thank you, sweetheart, for your patience, your loyalty, your counsel, and your love.  Without it, I would not be standing here.  And I will never be able to make it up to you, but I look forward to spending some more time with you and Walker so I can give it a shot.

Serving as the White House Press Secretary under President Obama has been an incredible honor.  I’ve had the opportunity to advocate for his vision of the country, the same vision that deeply resonated with me when I signed up to work for him in Iowa in March 2007.

And while those of us who have been fortunate enough to serve him here will go on to make a difference in new ways, I take heart in knowing that all of you will still be here.  I draw confidence in knowing that you are driven by the same spirit that prompted those young kids that I mentioned at the top of my briefing a couple of weeks ago to move to an Iowa town that they’d never heard of to organize support for the Obama campaign.

You have the same determination as the young people who are moving to Washington, D.C. today, with no job, with no contacts and no prospects, who are hoping to work in the Trump administration.  You’re motivated in the same way as the career civil servants, like the one as the Department of Education, who’s trying to stretch her agency’s budget to ensure as many Hispanic kids as possible can get a decent education.  You have so much in common with these people because each of you and what you do every day is critical to the success of our democracy.

There will be days when you’ll show up to work tired.  I know the same was true of those Obama organizers in Iowa.  There will be days where you will feel disrespected.  And I know many of the young Republican staffers who move to Washington looking for a job will feel that way at times.  It’s hard to pound the pavement in this town when you don't know anybody.  There will be days where you will wonder if what you're doing even makes a difference.  And I know that our civil servants sometimes wonder the same thing.

But I assure you, if you -- the most talented, experienced, effective press corps in the world -- didn't play your part in our democracy, we would all notice.  Your passion for your work and its centrality to the success of our democracy is a uniquely American feature of our government.  It’s made President Obama a better President and a better public servant.  And it’s because you persevere and you never go easy on us.

So even though it’s my last day, you better not let up now.  So in that spirit, let me say for the last time standing up here -- Josh, you want to get us started with questions.

Q    Sure.  Thanks, Josh.  Oh!  (Applause.)

THE PRESIDENT:  I’m not interrupting because he was saying nice things about you guys -- (laughter) -- because I largely concur.

When I first met Josh Earnest, he was in Iowa.  I think he was wearing jeans.  He looked even younger than he was.  And since my entire campaign depended on communications in Iowa, I gave him a pretty good once-over.  And there are a couple things I learned about him right away.  Number one, he’s just got that all-American, matinee, good-looking thing going.  (Laughter.)  That's helpful.  Let’s face it -- a face made for television.  Then the guy’s name is Josh Earnest -- (laughter) -- which if somebody is speaking on your behalf is a pretty good name to have.  (Laughter.)

But what struck me most, in addition to his smarts and his maturity and his actual interest in the issues, was his integrity.  There are people you meet who you have a pretty good inkling right off the bat are straight-shooters and were raised to be fundamentally honest and to treat people with respect.  And there are times when that first impression turns out to be wrong, and you're a little disappointed.  And you see behind the curtain that there’s spin and some hype and posturing going on.  But then there’s others who, the longer you know them, the better you know them, the more time you spend with them, the more you're tested under tough situations, the more that initial impression is confirmed.

And I have now known this guy for 10 years, almost, and I’ve watched him grow and I’ve watched him advance, and I’ve watched him marry, and I’ve watched him be a father, and I’ve watched him manage younger people coming up behind him.  And he’s never disappointed.  He has always been the guy you wanted him to be.

And I think that if you're the President of the United States and you find out that this is the guy who has been voted the most popular Press Secretary ever by the White House Press Corps, that may make you a little nervous, thinking well, maybe the guy’s going -- being too solicitous towards the press.  But the fact is, is that he was worthy of that admiration.

He was tough, and he didn't always give you guys everything you wanted.  But he was always prepared.  He was always courteous.  He always tried to make sure he could share with you as much of our thinking and our policy and our vision as possible, and tried to be as responsive as possible.  And that's how he trained the rest of his team to be.

So, of the folks that I’ve had the great joy and pleasure of working with over the last 10 years on this incredible journey, this guy ranks as high as just about anybody I’ve worked with.  He is not only a great Press Secretary, but more importantly, he is a really, really good man.  And I’m really, really proud of him.

So, Josh, congratulations.  (Applause.)

And, Natalie and Walker, thanks for putting up with all of this -- because they've made sacrifices, too.

MR. EARNEST:  Thank you, sir.

Q    Before you go, respond to Vladimir Putin?

THE PRESIDENT:  I’m going to be here (laughter) --



Q    Where are you going on Friday?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  Well, that was awfully generous.  So the President will be back tomorrow.  He’ll be standing here and he’ll be answering your questions.  Today you’re going to settle for me.

So, Josh, you want to get us started?

Q    Sure.  Thanks, Josh, and I want to thank you and your team for your hard work and service in your roles.  We’ve all tussled aggressively with you over the last many years, but that was as it should be, and you all have continued to always engage with us and we appreciate that.

Following up on the question that was just asked, have the Obamas decided where they will be heading when they board the Presidential aircraft for the final time on Friday?

MR. EARNEST:  Yes.  Josh, I can tell you that the First Family is looking forward to flying to Palms Spring, California on Friday.  The President vowed to take his family to a destination that is warmer than Washington, D.C. on Friday, and Palm Springs fits the bill.  This is a community that the President has visited on a number of occasions as President of the United States.  He and his family have enjoyed the time they have spent there in the past and they’re looking forward to traveling there on Friday.

Q    And President Putin today was accusing the Obama administration of spreading false information about the President-elect in an attempt to delegitimize his presidency and said that those in this administration who did that were worse than prostitutes.  Does the Obama administration have any comment on that?

MR. EARNEST:  That’s an interesting metaphor that he chose there.  Listen, as I’ve said on a number of occasions, the men and women of the United States intelligence community are patriots.  They are experts in their field.  They do their work not because of the glory associated with it -- because most of the time they have to keep their names secret.  They don’t do it for the big pay -- because in many situations they could make a whole lot more money in the private sector.  They do their important work to keep our country safe because they love this country, and they have served us incredibly well in keeping us safe.

They have served President Obama enormously well.  And this is not the first time that the intelligence community has had some uncomfortable things to say about Russia.  These are the kinds of the things that I’m sure the Russians would rather not hear.  But ultimately -- and this is something that the next administration is going to have to decide -- there’s a pretty stark divide here.

On one side, you’ve got the men and women of the United States intelligence community.  You’ve got Democrats in Congress -- you’ve got Republicans in Congress -- who are concerned, deeply, about the way that the Russian apparatus sought to call into question the legitimacy and stability of our democracy.  On the other side, you’ve got Wikileaks and the Russians.  And the incoming administration is going to have to decide which side they’re going to come down on.  And it will be among the very interesting things that all of you will be closely watching in the next week.

Q    I was wondering as you were reflecting over the last eight years whether you can identify the greatest achievement that you felt you were able to accomplish, and also the biggest regret that you have as you’re leaving this part of your life.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think there are two things that come to mind.  The first is that, over the course of the eight years that I’ve worked here in the White House, the President’s communication team walked in this building at a time of dramatic change in the media environment, in the news business, thanks largely to advancements in technology, and updating and modernizing and capitalizing on those new opportunities was an important part of President Obama’s success in the White House.

I cite this example because I think it’s a good one as you all consider the relationship that you’re going to build with the incoming administration.  It’s a good example because some of the things that we’ve heard from the incoming administration has raised some concerns, at least based on what I’ve read publically.

Some of the things that we tried to do -- capitalizing on new technology, breaking news on Twitter, having the President film videos that we released on Facebook, having the President engage in conversations that were released to the public with people who aren’t journalists but people who have a strong following nonetheless, whether that’s somebody like Marc Maron or any of the YouTube personalities that President Obama has an opportunity to visit with.  Bear Grylls would fit in this category -- all of that was disconcerting to people in this room and was the source of some friction between our operations.  But those changes were beneficial to the American people, and to this President, and to this White House.  Because in a changing environment, we need to capitalize on every available opportunity to make sure that the President’s voice and his message is heard, and those were good opportunities to do that.

So my hope is that, as you all navigate this new relationship, that you’ll protect the things that are worth protecting -- protecting this daily briefing, and the regular exchange that senior officials have at the White House with all of you to answer tough questions, to be held accountable, to respond for calls for greater transparency.

It’s uncomfortable to be in a position of authority, certainly a position of responsibility, and to be subjected to those kinds of questions.  That’s true even when you’re doing the right thing for the right reasons.  But it’s a necessary part of our democracy.  And so my hope is that the essence of this relationship between the White House Press Corps and the White House Press Office will be preserved and it will be maintained for future generations to benefit from.

But there also was a good reason not just to -- there’s also a good reason to not just raise objections because proposed changes depart from the way we’ve been doing things for a long time.  The fact that we’ve been doing something the same way for a long time is not, in and of itself, a good reason to keep doing things the same way.

So this is going to require a lot of hard work, probably going to require building some trust.  But I’m optimistic that the White House Press Corps and the White House Press Office can continue to adapt to the modern environment even as some of the basics and this important principle continues to be protected.  And I feel like we’ve navigated that pretty well, and that certainly was an important part of my responsibilities here, both in my first five and half years as the Deputy White House Press Secretary and certainly in the last two-and-a-half as the Press Secretary.

And with regard to things that I could have done better, you can probably point to an exchange in every briefing transcript and find a place where I could have said it more cleanly or more effectively or more clearly, so I’m sure there are many of them.

The one example that always comes to mind when I’m asked about this is in early September, the first week in September of 2015, we were in the midst of negotiating -- or working with Congress to protect the Iran deal.  You’ll recall that there was an opportunity for Congress to vote to pass a resolution of disapproval of the agreement, and we were working hard to build a veto-proof minority in Congress to protect the President’s veto of that resolution of disapproval.  And quickly, our attention turned to actually building a substantial support in the Senate to allow that agreement to survive a filibuster.

And I inadvertently announced Senator Warner’s support for the Iran deal before he has announced it.  So our leg staff wasn’t too happy with me.  Senator Warner wasn’t too happy with me.  But when I called Senator Warner shortly after the briefing to apologize, I explained to him that it was an honest mistake, and I avoided, with one exception, doing briefings after a red-eye flight, which I suspect contributed to that error back in September of 2015.

But the one thing that I do feel good about, and the thing that I’m proud of, and this is a lot -- a lot of credit goes to some of the people that I mentioned at the beginning -- I always felt well-prepared when I was standing up here, and I always felt prepared to tell the truth and to give you as clear a sense as possible the President’s thinking on a particular issue.  And in some ways, that's the most important mandate of the person that's standing up here.  And I'm proud of the way that we fulfilled that.

Q    Thanks, Josh.

MR. EARNEST:  Thank you.

Jeff.

Q    Josh, first of all, on behalf of the White House Correspondents Association, we want to thank you for your commitment to regular briefings with us.  We haven't always agreed on everything, and there has always been some tension, which is normal between a White House and the press corps that covers it, but we are grateful to you and your team for working with the Correspondents Association and for your commitment to dealing with us on a daily basis.  So, thank you.

MR. EARNEST:  Thank you.

Q    That hat off, I would ask you a question today about Iran.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.

Q    The Iranian President said today that President-elect Trump cannot unilaterally cancel the nuclear deal and has said it was meaningless what the President-elect has said about that.  Has the Obama administration offered any assurances to the Iranian government about that?  And, logistically, is it true, or is it not true, that President-elect Trump could, in fact, nullify the deal?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, there are not any -- you’ve heard the President say this on a number of occasions -- there are not any assurances that this administration has made to foreign leaders about what the incoming administration would do.  The incoming President will determine what he believes is the best course for the country, and he'll make that decision accordingly.

With regard to the international agreement to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon, this is not just an agreement between the United States and Iran.  This is an agreement between Iran and some of our closest allies, and some countries with whom we don't regularly get along on every issue but serve on the United Nations Security Council, and all of those other countries are committed to this agreement because it does prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon.

You’ll recall that this was one of the foremost foreign policy challenges facing this President when he took office.  The world was deeply concerned about the rapid progress that Iran was making toward building a nuclear bomb.  And that progress was halted and rolled back because of the tough, principled diplomacy that we initiated and implemented over years to reach this point.

And, in fact, just yesterday, the General Director of the IAEA, Mr. Amano, issued a statement, and I'm just going to read a couple sentences.  “Iran has removed excess centrifuges and infrastructure from the Fordow fuel enrichment plant, in line with its nuclear-related commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.”  That's the international agreement.

The JCPOA required Iran, within one year from implementation day, to complete the removal of all excess centrifuges and infrastructure from the Fordow fuel enrichment plant and to transfer them to storage at the Natanz fuel enrichment plant, under continuous Agency monitoring.  That's a remarkable step.  You will recall the dramatic moment in September of 2009 when President Obama, with other world leaders, announced to the world this secret nuclear facility that Iran had constructed and was using to advance toward a nuclear weapon.

So this is an agreement that's worked.  It's an agreement that's going to require conscientious implementation; it's going to require continued diplomacy.  We're going to need to work with the rest of the international community to make sure that Iran is adhering to the commitments that they’ve made.  But after doing that for a year, we've gotten proof of concept.  This has worked.

And as the incoming President considers the best path forward, we're hopeful, and even optimistic, that he'll consider the success of the last year as he designs a policy for the years ahead.

Q    The President has made a slew of appointments this week in his last few days in office to places like the Kennedy Center Honors -- the Kennedy Center Board, and others.  Why is this happening now?  And do you have any ethical concerns about doing this sort of on the way out?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't.  I think the list of people that the President has put forward for these important positions speaks for themselves.  These are outstanding members of the community, some of whom have served this President and this White House, and have done so with extraordinary distinction.  And these are new and different ways for them to serve that appeal to their own personal interests.  So I think this is -- I know this is entirely consistent with what previous Presidents have done.  This is entirely consistent with the executive authority that’s vested in the White House.  And President Obama is executing that authority consistent with the best interests of the American people.

Q    Lastly, do you have any reaction to British Prime Minister May’s announcement today that Britain will exit the single market when it leaves the European Union?

MR. EARNEST:  Jeff, what we've been saying from the beginning is that the United States was going to be encouraging both the leaders of the EU and the leaders in the UK to work effectively together to design a relationship among these critically important American allies.  And we've urged them to engage in that process in a way that is as transparent as possible to prevent any sort of economic disruptions from misunderstandings or from surprises.  And both sides have worked to do that.

But ultimately, it’s going to be up to them to design a relationship that is supported by their constituents.  That certainly is going to make these kinds of conversations more complicated.  But this reflects the will of the people as the British people voted in a referendum last summer.  And there’s a lot of hard work that their elected representatives need to do to design a relationship with the EU that serves them best.  And it’s firmly in the interest of the United States for them to do that effectively, and we certainly have supported them as they’ve done that over the last several months, and I anticipate the incoming administration will do the same.

Olivier.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Just two for you.  Piggybacking on Jeff’s question, one of the posts you guys announced is an ambassadorial nominee to the Republic of Congo.  I can’t imagine you think that is going to get confirmed.  What’s the rationale behind that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Olivier, I think it’s a couple of things.  The first is, you never know.  Second is -- so you’re saying there’s a chance?  (Laughter.)  That’s a fun movie.  I probably should have spent more time quoting from “Dumb and Dumber.”  (Laughter.)  I guess that would have been a regret of my two-and-a-half-year tenure here.

I think the other thing, in some cases, this is also sending a clear signal to Congress about who are people who are qualified for these jobs.  And so this can send a clear signal both in terms of their career trajectory, even if they’re not confirmed for these positions, but that the President has got a lot of confidence in their ability to handle significant responsibilities.  And so even if they are not confirmed for the position that they’ve been nominated for, there may be future opportunities in a similar area where they could continue to serve the United States.

But we’ve obviously talked a lot about how there are many deserving, worthy, talented Americans who have been put forward by this administration and who have been treated in breathtakingly unfair ways by Republicans in Congress.  And that is a source of deep disappointment that we continue to feel even in our last days in office here.

Q    And the second one -- on this President’s watch, North Korea has moved ahead with its missile program and its nuclear program.  Does that weigh on the President’s mind?  Has he discussed it with the President-elect?

MR. EARNEST:  I have refrained from getting into the content of the conversations between the two men.  What I can say is I know that the President’s National Security Council and his national security team has been engaged with the incoming President’s team on a range of issues, including on North Korea.  So I am confident that this challenge is on the radar screen of the incoming President and his team.

With regard to President Obama’s work in this area, we have not made as much progress as we would have liked in halting North Korea’s nuclear activities that are in violation of a range of international agreements.  What we have succeeded in doing, however, is building a rock-solid international consensus, including with countries like Russia and China, about the need to apply further pressure to North Korea to refrain from those kinds of destabilizing, provocative actions.  And that’s an important step and will serve the incoming administration well as they work on this challenge.

What President Obama has also done is work closely with the civilian and uniformed leadership at the Department of Defense to ensure that our defense posture in the Asia Pacific is able to protect the American people from this threat.  So that has involved the deployment of additional ships with anti-ballistic missile capabilities.  It has involved the construction of sensitive and sophisticated radar that can be used in conjunction with those systems to protect the American people.  And we’ve worked closely with allies like Japan and South Korea to construct those defenses.

So the American people, because of the decisions that have been made by the Commander-in-Chief, are safe from North Korea’s current capabilities.  But we continue to be concerned about their actions, and we’re going to need to work effectively with the international community to address that situation.

Paul.

Q    Josh, thanks for your efforts these last few years, first of all --

MR. EARNEST:  Thank you.

Q    This is sort of a history question.  When historians look at Presidents, they often cite, well, they did X, Y and Z.  But it’s also fair to look at perhaps mistakes, quagmires that Presidents avoided getting into.  What did the President sort of avoid, in your judgment, that might have done a lot of harm?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, well, certainly, as you know, with regard to our efforts to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL, the President has been mindful of the recent lessons of U.S. military entanglements in the Middle East.  And the President does not believe that our interests were advanced by the strategy that was employed by the previous administration, and, in fact, he ran for this job in part on his opposition to some of the strategies that had been put in place before.

And the President does believe that the strategy that we’ve put in place against ISIL is working.  We’ve made important progress in rolling back more than half the territory that ISIL previously controlled in Iraq.  We’ve rolled back a substantial quantity of territory that they previously controlled in Syria.  And we did that without a large-scale offensive ground combat operation involving American troops on the ground.

What we have done is we have -- the President has dispatched a much smaller number of U.S. forces, some of whom are in a very -- working in a very dangerous situation, to offer advice and assistance to local forces and regional forces that are fighting for their own region, and fighting for their own country.

And that is a strategy that the President believes is much more likely to lead to long-term success.  It’s going to build the capacity of these local forces to police their own country and secure their own country.

Those forces are, of course, augmented by U.S. forces with a range of capabilities -- whether that’s U.S. military pilots who can take strikes on ISIL targets or other extremist targets in that region of the world.  There are U.S. forces with remarkable capabilities that can carry out raids against high-value targets and can capitalize on troves of intelligence that they may be able to acquire.  And it also involves U.S. trainers who are building up the capacity of those forces -- other forces, local forces -- and then supporting them, advising them, and assisting them on the battlefield.

So that's the strategy that President Obama has put in place.  He believes that has served the country well, both because of how it has been effective in taking the fight to ISIL, and because of the likely long-term success that the President believes that we are on track to enjoy.  And all that was done without the kind of large-scale ground combat operation that characterized previous entanglements in the Middle East.

Q    So the footnotes answer is you avoid a foreign quagmire, is what you're saying.

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, I think that's true -- even as we engage in a robust defense of the American people.  That's what has to come first.  And, in fact, the President believes that our national security does benefit from a strategy that avoids quagmires, but does apply intense pressure to those extremist organizations that would do us harm.  That's the crux of the strategy, and it’s worked.

Q    The second question is, if you look at, say, Gallup polling for every President from Truman up to your boss, he is leaving with actually the fourth highest approval of all of them.  John F. Kennedy is exempted.  Clinton, then Reagan, then Eisenhower with 59 -- and then your boss.  And he’s ahead of everybody else.  How does that -- does that strike you as about -- how do you react to that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, that obviously I think is -- I know that President Obama is proud of that and I think it is an indication of -- certainly of the success that we've had in just the last couple of years.

Q    I mean, his critics say, well, he doesn't deserve that.  Others say -- you know how it is.  People say it’s --

MR. EARNEST:  Look, there will be people on both sides who will do their own analysis of the polls.  Look, it’s not just the Gallup Poll that indicates the uniquely high standing that's enjoyed by the President right now.  So we're obviously proud of that.  I do think it’s a testament to a lot of work that we've done here over the last 12 to 18 months.  But it’s also a reflection of the kind of early investments that President Obama made in the first couple of years of his presidency that have taken root and are now flowering -- at the risk of torturing that analogy.

There are remarkable benefits that -- just one example. President Obama, in his first couple of months in office, made a politically unpopular decision to rescue the American auto industry.  That was a decision -- a policy decision that did not poll well in the state of Michigan, a state that had more to benefit from that rescue than any other state in the country when it comes to their economy.  But since the President made that important decision, the manufacturing sector has created 800,000 jobs.  And the American auto industry is manufacturing and selling as many cars as they ever have.

So that's I think a good example of how a tough decision that the President made early on was not one that was going to show immediate benefits, butb looking back, eight years later, it was clearly the right decision.  And the fact that it wasn’t politically popular at the time, I think only gives people more confidence that the President was making the right decisions for the right reasons.

Michelle.

Q    Josh, we've heard one member of Congress call Donald Trump not a legitimate President.  Now the number of Democrats who aren’t attending the inauguration is up over 40, and they're sort of framing this as a boycott.  What do you think of those words and actions?  And is this just contributing to the division right now?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don't think it’s contributing to the division, but I do think it’s a reflection of the division in the country right now.

To be clear about the President’s point of view, since the day after the election, some eight hours after the final results were called, President Obama spoke in the Rose Garden and he spoke forcefully, with conviction, about the determination that he and his team would show in trying to facilitate a smooth and effective transition with the incoming team.  And we've lived up to that promise that the President made on November 9th.  And in many ways, I think actions speak louder than words, particularly with regard to the way this administration has worked closely with the incoming administration to ensure -- or at least give them the best opportunity at a running start.

But all of that was rooted in the institutional responsibilities that the President and his team have to serve the American people, is to make sure that the person that they've elected President of the United States has an opportunity to succeed and hit the ground running.  And we have been challenged to do that in spite of our in some cases profound concerns with some of the rhetoric and policy positions that are being articulated by the other side.

So I think most of this, Michelle, is just a function of the different roles.  Members of Congress have a different responsibility.  They are freer to express their opinion in a way that they chose.  They don't have the same kind of institutional responsibility that the administration has.  And I’m proud of the fact that we've fulfilled it.

Q    You're saying that the administration would say similar things and do similar things if they could?

MR. EARNEST:  I wouldn’t speculate on what people around here would say.  I think I’m just pointing to what we have done.  And that's a reflection of keeping the President’s promise.

Q    You've spoken a lot about the efforts, like the strong efforts that the administration has put out for this smooth transition.  So do you think that these -- do you think it’s important what these -- some of these Democrats are saying and doing?  Do you think it’s important for that to be said at this point?  Or do you think that what they're doing is just sort of harming the smooth transition?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I don't think that what they're doing is harming the smooth transition, primarily because when we're talking about a smooth transition, we're talking about making sure that the incoming administration is aware of what we've been doing over the last eight years and of the looming decisions that they’ll have to make when they enter office.  We want to make sure that they can benefit from all of the lessons that we've learned over the last eight years about building and running an effective team that's in charge of the federal government.

Those are the kinds of things that are critical to a smooth and effective transition, and I don't think that there’s anything that members of Congress have said that’s going to derail that effort.

Q    Okay.  And there’s been plenty that has been said about certain posts that will possibly be open for a long time, certain structures just not seeming ready at all.  I mean, we hear things on our end about concerns within the administration as to the next administration’s readiness.  So you’ve had a unique look at that smooth transition that you mentioned.  Do you think that there’s readiness there?  I mean, do you feel confident that the next administration is ready to pick up the reins?

MR. EARNEST:  I certainly am not in a position to be able to assess across the board what the level of readiness is of the incoming team.  I'll let them describe what efforts they have taken to ensure that they’re ready to assume this awesome responsibility.  And we certainly have tried to be there at every turn as they’re making those decisions to support them and to give them the best possible information so that they can make the best possible decision.  But when it comes to assessing where things stand, I'll leave that to the incoming team.

Q    And do you feel like this is the last briefing of this kind that we might see for a very long time?

MR. EARNEST:  I hope not, but I don't know.  I'll let the incoming team speak to that.

Justin.

Q    The President-elect said on Friday that U.S. companies can't compete because our currency was too strong and that that was “killing us.”  I'm wondering if that's a concern that the White House shares.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, we have, over the last eight years, abided by the longstanding tradition of allowing the United States Secretary of the Treasury to speak about the value of the dollar.  Of course, those policy decisions when it relates to currency are made by the Federal Reserve, so that's not something I've spoken on at great length here.

I did happen to see the President-elect’s comments.  I believe there is one factual point that is worth referencing, which is that we have seen with regard to China’s currency that it is appreciating in value over the last 18 months.  That's just a fact.  With regard to what sort of policy they’ve implemented to do that or what their aim may be, I'd refer you to the Chinese.  I wouldn't speculate on that.  But just as a factual matter, the Chinese currency has appreciated over the last year to 18 months.

Q    Are you concerned that an aide to the President-elect reportedly was in discussions about joint investments -- (inaudible)

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I haven't seen those specific reports.  I think what I can say is that given the intelligence community’s conclusion about the efforts of the Russians to intervene in our democracy, questions about the ties between senior government officials and the Russian government are worthy of careful examination.

And that will obviously be the responsibility of Congress, and it may end up being the responsibility of some law enforcement officials if they choose to initiate those kinds of investigations.  If they choose to do that, that would be a decision that they would make entirely on their own based on their own discretion and not something that this administration would try to influence even in our last few days here.

But there are structures in place where people have the authority that they need to conduct those kinds of investigations.  And with regard to Congress, they’ll face a decision about whether or not they choose to exercise that authority.  And with regard to law enforcement officials, they’ll have to decide on their own if this is worthy of an inquiry.

Q    Last one.  Your friend, Senator Schumer -- (laughter)  -- suggested --

MR. EARNEST:  I'm really hoping that he accepted that opening in the spirit in which it was offered.  We'll see, I guess.  (Laughter.)

Q    -- suggested today that Representative Price might have broken the law on this stock transaction of a medical device -- and he later introduced legislation that could have governed.  Acknowledging what you said before that the President-elect should have some flexibility to pick his own team, do you find this report to be disqualifying for the President-elect’s choice as head of HHS?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think this report is indicative of a couple of things.  The first is, given the incoming administration’s priority that is placed on draining the swamp, I think they have the unique obligation to explain exactly what happened.  Because the facts of the report don't appear to be that complicated -- you have a member of Congress buying a stock in a company, and within a week sponsoring legislation that would benefit that company and its stock price, only to see the introduction of that legislation followed shortly thereafter by a political donation from that company to the campaign account of the member of Congress in question.

So this doesn’t seem like a complicated scheme.  It seems like exactly the kind of financial entanglement that’s left a lot of people feeling alienated from Washington, D.C., that's left a lot of people questioning the motives of members of Congress.  Was he sponsoring that legislation because of his own personal motive -- personal financial interest?  Was he sponsoring that legislation because he knew it was likely to lead to a political contribution?  Or was he sponsoring that bill because he thought it was good policy?  It's hard to know.  It's an open question.

So this is why Congress has a responsibility to offer advice and consent for the President’s Cabinet nominations.  And I suspect this is going to be an issue that's going to receive careful scrutiny -- hopefully not just on the part of Democrats, but also on the part of Republicans who are interested in making sure that the incoming President’s Cabinet nominees are looking to do the job for the right reasons.

Jon.

Q    So are you suggesting he may have broken the law?

MR. EARNEST:  I'm saying that I don't know whether or not

-- I certainly can't make a statement that definitive.  If law enforcement officials choose to investigate the situation, that’s something that they will do based on their own knowledge of the law and based on their own discretion.  I think I'm just commenting on the fact that reports do raise a lot of questions. And again, this isn't some sort of complicated financial scheme. We don't need to have Michael Lewis explain it to us in a 300-page book.  This one seems pretty concerning just based on a couple paragraphs of a news report from CNN.

Q    Okay.  I've got a couple questions.  First, I just want to say thank you, Josh, for being accessible during your time here as Press Secretary and Deputy Press Secretary, and thank you for working as hard as you have to answer our questions, including, but not exclusively, those questions that you didn’t like.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  There were more than a few of those.  (Laughter.)  Thank you for your kind words, Jon.  I appreciate it.

Q    Back to the question Josh asked about Vladimir Putin, putting aside the intelligence community.  Putin made a specific allegation, pretty explosive one, coming from another global leader.  He’s accusing the Obama administration of trying to delegitimize the incoming Trump administration.  What’s your response to Vladimir Putin?

MR. EARNEST:  First of all, it sounds like he got his copy of the talking points.  Second --

Q    From whom?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don't know.  But it certainly sounds a lot like what the incoming administration’s team is saying.  But it is not the first time that the Russian President has called into question the veracity of the United States government.  Right?

This is a Russian government that recently said that they were focused entirely on ISIL inside of Syria, and raising questions about what the United States and our allies were doing to fight those extremists.  That wasn’t true.  In fact, what we know is that the one place that Russia can point to where they’ve made progress against ISIL is in Palmyra; ISIL has since taken it back and is now using some of the equipment that the Syrian regime, with the support of the Russians, moved to Palmyra.  And that's going to put the United States and our coalition partners who are going after ISIL at even greater risk.

So it's not the first time that the President of Russia has said things about the U.S. government that just don't withstand any scrutiny.

Q    So it's not true?

MR. EARNEST:  Of course, it's not true.  And the suggestion -- the reason that I answered Josh’s question the way that I did was that the suggestion all along -- and this is a suggestion that was repeated just yesterday by the President-elect -- was raising doubts about the integrity and intentions of the men and women of the intelligence community.  And that is deeply misguided, as I've said before.

And particularly to call into question the integrity of somebody like John Brennan, somebody who has served at the CIA for three decades, somebody who served this country in dangerous locations around the world to try to keep us safe -- I'm offended by it.

Q    Josh, on the question of the next administration and its communication strategy, looking back, was there ever any consideration by anybody in this White House of shutting this briefing room down, of taking reporters and moving them out of the West Wing?

MR. EARNEST:  No, there was not.

Q    What would it say, symbolically and practically -- what message would it send to the country if this briefing room, if this workspace were shut down and reporters were banished to another part of the White House grounds?

MR. EARNEST:  I lead this in my long comments at the beginning about how the United States has a rather unique arrangement between our government and the independent media.  The fact that all of you represent independent news organizations and have regular access to the White House, have regular access to workspace where you can do your job, have a venue where you can enter the room -- the Briefing Room -- at almost any hour, and can hold people in power accountable is really important.

You also have access to senior White House officials right through that door.  Right up the ramp outside that door, you can come into my office at a moment’s notice to ask question and demand answers and demand transparency.  And as I mentioned earlier, sometimes that's a little inconvenient; sometimes it's uncomfortable; sometimes it's frustrating because you're dissatisfied with the answer that was given, but it's necessary for the success of our democracy.

And I think there are some people who might say, Jon, that, well, this is -- it's just symbolic that you have the White House Press Corps in the White House.  And I would say it's a really important symbol.  It's more than just symbolism.  But even taking that argument at face value, there is something symbolically important about all of you gathering here every single day to hold people in power accountable, to demand answers, to demand transparency, to demand facts.  And your ability to do that is going to be affected if you don't have regular access to the White House, if you're not able to do your job from the White House, and if there’s not a natural, readily available venue for you to hold senior officials accountable.

So this is, again, a relationship that President Obama believed was important to invest in.  He made this a priority, and it doesn’t mean because he liked all your coverage.

Q    He could have had more press conferences --

MR. EARNEST:  He probably could have.  And again, I think this is exactly a good illustration -- you should be asking for more, and you should say that we appreciate President Obama’s investment, but there is more that he could have done.  That's the nature of this relationship.  And it means that you're doing your job, but it also means the President of the United States is doing his job.  And I don't know if the incoming administration is going to see it that way, but I hope they do.

April.

Q    Josh, one of your, I guess, mentees -- mentors, Mike McCurry said the press had a friendly, adversarial relationship with the White House.  And with that, understanding your very interesting position between the press and the President, have you taken any kind of advocacy role positives about what you just said to Sean Spicer, the incoming press secretary, or has anyone in this administration talked to the incoming administration about exactly what you just said?

MR. EARNEST:  What I can tell you is, as you know, my colleague, Jen Psaki and I had an opportunity to visit with Mr. Spicer in what will soon be his new office a couple of weeks ago.  And we had a nice conversation.  And we talked about everything from the rather peculiar logistics of getting things done around the White House, but also the work to prepare for the briefing and to ensure that government agencies are coordinated in their messaging efforts with the White House.  It was a good conversation.  But one of the pieces of advice that I had for him was to engage with the White House Correspondents Association.

I remember vividly when we started here.  I was the deputy press secretary during President Obama’s earliest days in office.  And we worked very closely at the time with Jennifer Loven, who was an AP correspondent and then was president of the White House’s Correspondents Association.  And she did an excellent job of helping to educate us about what your expectations were and she helped us avoid inadvertent conflicts.  There are certainly situations where we might be tempted to do something that we didn’t think was that big of a deal that you all would view with deep suspicion as an effort to make your job harder.

And so what I encouraged Sean to do is to engage with the gentlemen that all of you have elected to represent you as the President of the White House Correspondents Association.  So Jeff is somebody who knows this place well, and Jeff is somebody who can be an honest broker.  And so he’s got a -- Jeff and I actually had this conversation before the election about how valuable our relationship with Jennifer Loven was in 2009, and how his relationship with the incoming administration -- whether it was the Clinton administration or the Trump administration -- was going to be critically important.

And, look, Jeff knows his stuff and he’s got exactly the right temperament for managing these kinds of things.  And I do think that if Jeff, as your elected representative, and Sean, as the person designated as the top spokesperson in the government by the President-elect, can work effectively together, that I think a lot of the concerns that have been expressed in the last couple of weeks can certainly be managed.

And it doesn’t mean that everything he does is going to be satisfying to you; it shouldn’t be that way.  But I am optimistic that because of Sean’s genuine desire to represent his boss well and Jeff’s leadership in representing all of your interests, that these difficult things can get worked out.

Q    Did you specifically say we should stay in this building, stay here?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not going to get into a detailed readout of our conversation.  So I’m going to defer to him and let him announce what they choose to do.

Q    I have a couple of other questions really fast.  Being here all these years and being with the President since Iowa, meeting him since Iowa, what is the biggest takeaway as people are trying to rewrite his history now and trying to look at his legacy when you’re supposed to look, like, 10 years out?  What’s the biggest takeaway that we should know about this administration, and particularly this President?

MR. EARNEST:  I alluded to this at the top, too.  In 2007, when I first heard President Obama speak as a candidate for President of the United States, I actually wasn’t working for him.  I moved to Iowa in December of 2006 to work on Tom Vilsack’s presidential campaign.  And so I joined President Obama’s team, then-Senator Obama’s team, only a month or so after Governor Vilsack dropped out of the race.

And the reason that I was drawn to Senator Obama’s campaign was simply that he was giving voice to a vision of the country that deeply resonated with me.  He was articulating a vision for America that was inclusive, where everybody got a fair shot and a fair shake, and where we tried to transcend a politics that seemed too small, that it was not well-equipped to take on the difficult challenges that our country faced.  And he was willing to articulate that vision and those set of values, and defend them forcefully.

There was a sense among many Democrats, particularly throughout much of the Bush administration, that Democrats were a little on the back foot in trying to make our argument.  And to see this young and young-looking man, a newcomer on the scene, step up to the stage and almost defiantly articulate a vision of the country where everybody has got a shot, regardless of what you look like or where you come from, that there’s a whole lot more that unites us than drives us apart in this country because of our commitment to some of the basic founding principles of our country -- that resonated with me.

And so to answer your question, my takeaway is that for all that we’ve been through, for all that we’ve seen over the last decade, President Obama is as optimistic about the country and as committed to that vision as he has ever been.  And he is as resolute in advocating for and defending those values as he’s ever been.  And I find that genuinely inspiring, at the risk of laying it on a little thick.  I genuinely do.

On those days when I thought it was -- when I was tired, knowing that I was going to have to get up early in the morning and prepare to come and speak to all of you, I drew a lot of inspiration from knowing what a unique opportunity it was for me to have the opportunity to stand up here and to give voice to those values that I deeply believe in, and to know that my boss would support me in making that argument forcefully, without reservation, with deep conviction.

It’s been an honor to do that.  But mostly I admire and respect the President’s fidelity to those values even through all the twists and turns of the last 10 years.

Q    And lastly, you talk about laying it on thick.  I guess I want to say thank you for making sure that issues that were not necessarily the mainstream issues -- urban America, LGBT community, all sorts of communities out there that were not necessarily at the top of the fold or on the A block of the news -- for making sure we have answers for that.  How important is that for this White House to make sure those issues were addressed as well as the overarching issues of the day from the first two rows?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, this is actually a principle that the incoming administration has given some voice to -- that I know that Mr. Spicer has indicated a desire to be as inclusive as possible and to give as many different kinds of journalists and outlets and commentators the opportunity to participate in this session.  I think that’s a really good thing.  That’s exactly what we have done.  There’s never been a time that we’ve turned anybody away from participating in this briefing.  People who show up here on a regular basis with their hand in the air, regardless of which row they sit in -- they get called on.  Not every day -- (laughter.)  In part because it’s not unusual for me to get complaints about the length of the briefing.  But it’s fair to say that people who show up here regularly get called on regularly.

That’s a good thing.  And if that’s something that Mr. Spicer is committed to, and he wants to bring even more people into that process, people from the left and the right, we’ve certainly succeeded in doing that, and I hope he does, too.

Anita.

Q    Thank you.  A couple questions about Friday.  So I know a few of the -- several -- three former Presidents are going to be in town, and Secretary Clinton, obviously.  Is there any opportunity for the President to visit with the former Presidents there or at the Capitol or at the White House, or does that not happen?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware of any sort of formal get-together that the President will have with the former Presidents.  I wouldn’t be surprised if there is an opportunity when they’re at the Capitol for the President to see them, but it would just be pretty informal.  And we’ll do our best to keep you posted about how that shakes out.

Q    -- in my colleague’s profile of you, which came out today, that your last day is actually Thursday.  Does that mean most staff -- I know some people, it’s staggered that people are leaving, but does most of the staff leave on Thursday if they don’t -- aren’t involved in the actual --

MR. EARNEST:  Yes.  The vast majority of the White House staff will have their last day here at the White House on Thursday.  There is a small number of people that will continue to work through noon on Friday for the actual transition.

But it’s a pretty remarkable exercise that we’re undergoing here at the White House, and I give a lot of credit to my colleagues at the GSA and other people who are responsible for ensuring that I have an opportunity to work from my desk until 4 or 5 o’clock at night in the evening on Thursday, and they’re going to have that office up and running and prepared for Sean to sit down behind that desk at noon the next day.  So that’s no small undertaking, but it certainly requires that many of us get out of the way on Thursday afternoon so they can do their important work.

Q    You mentioned the President was going to California after the inauguration -- or the family is going.  When they return -- so they fly aboard the presidential aircraft, which we don’t call Air Force One then.  Does it wait for them, or are they on their own after that -- they can take commercial back?

MR. EARNEST:  They’re on their own after that.  I don’t know what their travel plans are, but that will be the President’s final trip aboard the presidential aircraft, so it will be to --

Q    Do you know how long they’re going to be there?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have any details about their time in Palm Springs and I don’t anticipate that that will be released.

Margaret.

Q    Josh, you said you didn’t think that boycotting the inauguration was really going to harm the peaceful transition, but is the President actively discouraging Democrats from boycotting, or would he discourage Democrats from boycotting the inauguration?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware that he has had a conversation discouraging people from participating in the inauguration.  And I’m not sure what he would say if he was asked if he would encourage people to do that.  Maybe you’ll get a chance to ask him that tomorrow.

Q    On two things actually, related to Russia.  Ambassador Power gave a speech today talking about U.S.-Russia.  She repeatedly used the phrase, “a willingness to lie” on behalf of Russia and that it’s actually a strategic deny-and-lie strategy they have.  Does President Obama feel that Vladimir Putin consistently lied to him?  I mean, is that how the President would characterize his relationship?

MR. EARNEST:  I think what Ambassador Power is making reference to are the public pronouncements that we’ve seen from the Russian government that routinely fly in the face of the facts on the ground.  I laid out the example to John with the situation in Syrian.  The example of Russian activity in Ukraine also applies.  Russia has steadfastly denied the presence of Russians in Ukraine who are actively working with separatists to try to undermine the central government in Ukraine.

So this is a tactic that we have seen form the Russians with regard to their public communications.  When the President has discussed his personal communications with Vladimir Putin, the President has indicated that President Putin is pretty blunt and businesslike.  And I think there’s only one time that I participated in one of those meetings and that was my observation as well.

Q    You agree he was blunt?

MR. EARNEST:  I would.  I would.

Q    But you would not say that he feels that in those conversations Putin has ever lied?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I don’t think I can account for all of the conversations between President Obama and President Putin.  I would just say that President Obama has often said that public perception about his behind-the-scenes interactions with President Putin aren’t usually correct, that they do have pretty businesslike interactions and President Putin is pretty blunt in those conversations.

And what Ambassador Power was obviously referring were some of the public communications that we've seen from the Russians to say things about their activities that just aren’t true.

Q    There have been reports last week about the Israelis, this week about British intelligence, suggesting that their conversations with the CIA asking for reassurance that known assets in Russia would not be shared by the incoming administration with Moscow.  In other words, asking the U.S. to keep its secrets secret.  Is that something that the White House has been aware of?  Are those reports in any way accurate?  And is that kind of request appropriate?

MR. EARNEST:  I can't speak to any of the conversations that our intelligence community has had with some of our closest allies.  I’ll let them describe those conversations.

The United States has worked hard to deepen our cooperation with the United Kingdom and the rest of our NATO allies for that matter, certainly as it relates to intelligence gathering.  Our ability to collect that intelligence and share it widely among our partners does make our alliance stronger.  And it makes our collective defense more effective.  But I can't speak to any specific instructions or requests that the British intelligence services may have made to American intelligence services.

Q    And lastly, you said you wouldn’t characterize the readiness of the incoming administration. Secretary Kerry did publicly suggest that he was -- the contact had been minimal with at least the incoming Secretary of State, should he be confirmed.  Would you say that the incoming administration has taken up the Obama administration in all of its offering to fully brief and fully read in the nominees?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Margaret, I think the thing that was evident to all of you in the earliest days of the transition is that the Trump administration had a pretty steep hill to climb with regard to their learning curve.  Is some of that related to the fact that they weren’t anticipating winning the election?  Probably.  But I think what we have seen over that time is conscientious, painstaking work on the part of the incoming administration to try to get up to speed.  And there has been substantial improvement in those efforts since the days immediately following the election.

I obviously can't speak to all of the conversations across the federal government.  But it’s certainly fair for you to conclude that the capacity and capability of the incoming team has improved markedly since the first days after the election.

Jordan.

Q    Thanks, Josh, for the final time.  I wanted to ask you about a report in The Washington Post yesterday that said the President plans to make several hundred commutations before his final day.  Can you confirm that's the plan?

MR. EARNEST:  I saw that report.  I don't have any news to announce from here with regard to any commutations.  But if there are any clemency requests that are granted, we’ll make sure you're among the first to hear about them.

Q    Yet last week you made an interesting argument about the differences between Edward Snowden and Chelsea Manning.  Can you at this point rule out that the President will give a pardon to Edward Snowden?

MR. EARNEST:  I can't rule anything in or out.  I think the one thing that the Department of Justice has said -- I’m looking at Brandi, and she’s giving me the poker face.  (Laughter.)  I believe what the Department of Justice has said is that -- there you go.  What they have said and what Brandi has told me is that -- (laughter) -- Mr. Snowden has not filed paperwork to seek clemency from the administration.  But I don't have any specific comments about whether or not that would impact any sort of presidential-level decision.

Sarah.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  On the note of pardons, the administration has been very proud of its ethical record.  And as we've seen in the past, some of these last-minute pardons can kind of trip some people up.  And so will -- the clemency initiative, there’s sort of a structure for those.  But with the pardons, will the President issue all his pardons at a point where we're still able to ask for an explanation about them?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I would say is simply that we're aware of the history that you've alluded to.  The President has been judicious about using this authority in a way that he believes is consistent with American interests and the pursuit of justice.  And if we feel it is ever necessary for us to make that case, we’ll want to make sure that we have ample opportunity to make it.

I think I’ll leave it there.

Q    And can you just offer any more details about the President’s last day, his last hours in office?  Will he still get the presidential daily briefing?  Can you tell us who specifically is actually going to be showing up here on the 20th?

MR. EARNEST:  You mean in terms of staff?

Q    Yes.

MR. EARNEST:  I don't have that in front of me, but we will provide you with some contact information for the morning of the 20th should you need it.

Q    I’m just mean in terms of what he’s doing.  Like is Chief of Staff McDonough going to be here?  NSC Advisor?

MR. EARNEST:  We’ll work to see if we can compile some of those details.  I don't have a lot of detailed information about that right now, but we’ll see if can get you something in advance of Friday.

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  And despite our differences, thank you for being fair.

MR. EARNEST:  Thank you, Kevin.  I appreciate that.

Q    And your staff is great, too, as well.

MR. EARNEST:  I appreciate it.

Q    Regardless of the clemency issue, is it fair to say that the process is still ongoing at this stage?  The review, is that still happening even today?

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, this is a process that largely lives at the Department of Justice, and they've been very focused on this important work.  They're working closely with the President’s attorneys here in the White House.  And, yes, it is fair to say that that work continues.

Q    I want to ask specifically about Chelsea Manning and Edward Snowden, in particular.  As it relates to Chelsea Manning, does the White House agree that Manning is being subjected to unfair treatment by the Army amid her daily fight to have her right to be identified as a woman?  Does the White House agree with that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’m not aware that the Commander-in-Chief has weighed in on this.  This is obviously complicated by the fact that Chelsea Manning is in the military criminal justice process and, of course, the Commander-in-Chief is at the top of the chain of command, which limits our ability to discuss her case in all that much detail.  But I’ll look and see if we have ever weighed on this specific question.  I know that it certainly is a question and a concern that's been raised by some of Chelsea Manning’s advocates.

Q    And for the record, she was sentenced to 35 years.  Does the White House believe that that was a just sentence?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t heard the President weigh in on that either, again for the same kind of chain-of-command reasons that I just cited.

Q    But he may tomorrow?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, if he chooses to -- you and Jordan will be among the first to know.  (Laughter.)

Q    Fair enough.  Jordan, I got first dibs.  (Laughter.)  Let me ask you about Edward Snowden.  Does his offer to turn himself in if Manning is, in fact, offered clemency weigh at all in the consideration for how the President might consider a pardon for Manning, or even for Snowden, do you think?

MR. EARNEST:  It does not, primarily because we believe that under any circumstances, Mr. Snowden should return to the United States and face the serious crimes with which he’s been charged.  He will, of course, be afforded the kind of due process that’s available to every American citizen who’s going through the criminal justice process.  But the crimes that he’s accused of committing are serious, and we believe that he should return to the United States and face them rather than seeking refuge in the arms of an adversary of the United States that has their own strategic interests in disseminating harmful -- or disseminating information in a harmful way.

Q    So for clarity’s sake, it seems apparent that there’s little doubt that Edward Snowden will not be offered a pardon by this President.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, it’s not something that -- I can’t rule out any offer of clemency, or rule it in, frankly, from here.

Q    Based on what you just said, though -- I mean, the President has been pretty clear, he hasn’t availed himself to even a conversation about prosecution or facing the charges that he may in fact be forced to face were he even here.  So based on that, it seems clear he’s not going to get a pardon, right?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, you’ve heard me note that that is one of the many differences between Mr. Snowden’s case and Chelsea Manning’s case.  But I can’t rule anything in or out at this point.

Q    Last one.  I want to ask you about Julian Assange.  Did the White House ask Britain or even Ecuador, perhaps, to take action against Julian Assange and/or shut down WikiLeaks at any point?  Did that come from this White House?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware of any specific request like that that was made.  You know that the U.S. intelligence community, and even the President, have expressed some deep concerns about the ties between Russian intelligence and WikiLeaks and other organizations like it that were created to disseminate either classified information or previously private information.  And we know that much of those efforts to disseminate that information was rooted in a Republican -- Russian strategy to undermine confidence in American democracy.

So we have profound concerns about the way that that organization, WikiLeaks, has operated, and we have expressed profound concerns about the way that some of the things that they have done and some of the information that they have released has harmed our national security, has put our military and our intelligence officers in harm’s way and made their dangerous work even more dangerous.  But I can’t speak to any specific requests that may have been made of the Brits or the Ecuadoreans.

Ron.

Q    Just to follow up on this -- the appointments of Valerie Jarrett, Susan Rice and others to these boards.  Are these appointments that cannot be reversed by the President -- the incoming President?  And were they made for that reason or with that in mind?

MR. EARNEST:  They weren’t made with that in mind.  I believe that these are the -- that the appointments on these kinds of boards are part of the President’s executive authority and part of his responsibility.  And he chose to fill a couple of those positions with two of his most trusted aides.

Q    So they’re probably -- are there terms?  Are there -- I guess it would vary depending upon the --

MR. EARNEST:  There are terms, but we can get you the details.

Q    There’s also -- there’s an education regulation that’s making its way -- I believe it’s before the White House Budget Office.  You’re looking at me like you don’t know what I’m talking about.

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t think I do.

Q    It’s a regulation that would essentially change the funding mechanism within school districts and apportion more money to lower-income areas as compared to higher-income areas.  The question is where is that, is it going to make it, so on and so forth.

MR. EARNEST:  Let me have my colleagues at the Office of Management and Budget circle back with you to give you an update on where that stands.

Q    And just a last thing -- can you give us any indication of what the President is really doing and focused on these last number of days?  I know you were asked about staffing and all that, but --

MR. EARNEST:  Other than saying really nice things about me -- (laughter) -- which I deeply appreciate, by the way?.

Q    It’s a -- I mean, I know he’s concerned about national security, I know he’s concerned about the transition.  But just -- I just wonder, what do you do when you have, like, a few days left after all this?

MR. EARNEST:  There’s a lot to be done.  Let me tell you at least one thing.  This morning, the President assembled senior members of his counterterrorism and homeland security team to review ongoing security planning for the 58th inauguration.  The President commended the comprehensive preparations across the law enforcement and intelligence community, and directed that all agencies maintain their high state of vigilance to ensure we are best postured to protect the homeland against individuals radicalized to violence.

The President was also briefed on counterterrorism operations in Iraq and Syria that are putting simultaneous pressure on ISIL inside Mosul and around Raqqa.  Over the weekend, as you may know, Iraqi security forces made significant gains in Mosul as ISIL defenses are collapsing in key parts of the city.  And in northern Syria, local partners continue to constrict ISIL’s movement in the vicinity of Raqqa.

The President noted the impact our strategy is having on the ground is the result of a deliberate effort to accelerate our campaign against ISIL, and that the coalition is well-postured to put ISIL on a path to lasting defeat.

I think the fact that the President held this meeting today is an indication that the President continues to be focused first and foremost on the safety and security of the United States and the American people.  And this is consistent with the kind of briefing that he has held with his national security team and with intelligence officials before major events.  The President typically does this before the holidays; he’ll often do this before the Fourth of July.  And obviously, with the upcoming inauguration, we want to make sure -- the President wanted to make sure that our security posture was in place to protect the American people.

Q    That’s a Situation Room meeting?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t know exactly where this meeting took place, but we can confirm that for you.

Q    Anything else?  Is he -- we’ve talked about pardons and commutations, and talked about appointments.  Is there anything else that we can expect over the next number of hours that are work product, if you will, that the President is trying to get done before he leaves?  Even if you can identify some areas.  We know he’s concerned about immigration.  We know he’s concerned about social justice.  We know he’s concerned about a lot of things.

MR. EARNEST:  Right.

Q    Can you point us to anything that he is, in the final hours, really trying to focus on and get done?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t have any announcements to preview, but the President has still got a lot of work to do.  And even in just the last couple of days here, he’s focused on the task at hand, even as he also does some of the other things around the White House, like bidding a fond farewell to members of his staff and other people from across the administration, and also I think spending some time thinking about his own time and his own tenure here.  But stay tuned.  If there’s more, we’ll let you know.

Carol.

Q    Thank you.  I guess I’ll follow on that note.  Can you give us an update on the President’s efforts to close Guantanamo?  And are you prepared at this time to just -- say it will remain open Friday afternoon?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I can confirm -- and I think this is something that you’ve already reported -- that there was a transfer of 10 detainees from the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay to the government of Oman.  With that transfer being completed, there are now 45 detainees at Gitmo.  When President Obama took office, the detainee population was at 242, so since that time, we’ve moved 193 detainees to 42 countries for repatriation, resettlement, or prosecution.

Obviously, that work was a result of the review that President Obama ordered almost exactly eight years ago today to ask the intelligence community and other national security agencies to engage in a case-by-case review of the files of the detainees, and determine if any of them could be transferred to other countries under a set of strict security requirements that would limit their ability to harm the United States.  And so that’s been an effort that has greatly reduced the prison population.

At this point, I don’t anticipate that we will succeed in that goal of closing the prison, but it’s not for a lack of trying -- that, I assure you.  And the only reason it didn’t happen is because of the politics that members of Congress in both parties, frankly, played with this issue.  And it has put the United States in a position where, because of the obstacles erected by Congress, terrorist organizations have a powerful recruiting tool, and millions in taxpayer dollars are wasted to operate this large facility for 45 people, potentially less.

That’s not a good use of taxpayer dollars, and it certainly isn’t the most effective way to protect our country.  And that’s not just a conclusion that President Obama has reached, that’s a conclusion that’s been reached by people like President Bush and senior members of his national security team.  So this isn’t a partisan issue, and I think the disappointment at Congress’s action in this area is also bipartisan in nature.

Q    Two follow-ups on that.  At what point did the President make that determination, that he would not succeed? And do you expect any additional transfers this week?

MR. EARNEST:  The possibility of additional transfers remains a possibility.  Look, I think once there was a -- once we’d reach the 30-day deadline for notifying Congress in advance of detainee transfers, the likelihood of succeeding in closing the prison was quite remote.

Q    One other quick question.  Chinese President Xi today delivered a speech in Davos where he gave a defense of globalization and warned against a trade war and protectionism, and this is obviously something the President has spoken a lot about, and I’m curious if you have any reaction to the Chinese President’s speech.

MR. EARNEST:  I didn’t read the text of President Xi’s remarks, but certainly based on the news coverage, I think this does surface a central question -- for the American people, for policymakers, for economic leaders, and even national security leaders -- about what role the United States is going to play in the global economy and what role the United States is going to play in Asia Pacific.  And President Obama put forward his own strategy, one that sought to deepen our alliances with Australia, South Korea, and Japan that has resulted in a beefed-up military presence in the Asia Pacific, to protect our allies, to deepen our coordination and cooperation with them, and to ensure they’re protected from threats that emanate in the region.

The President also felt strongly that that intensified security cooperation should be partnered with greater economic integration in that region of the world.  Southeast Asia in particular is home to some of the most dynamic economies in the world.  These are smaller countries, but they have rapidly growing middle-class populations, and many of the countries who signed the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement are home to those economies.  And the completion of that agreement and the ratification of that agreement by Congress would have given American businesses a better opportunity to compete in that part of the world.  That would have been good for our economy and good for our businesses and, most importantly, good for our workers.

The agreement would have required other countries to slash 18,000 taxes that they impose on American products.  It would have held those countries accountable for raising labor standards, raising human rights standards, raising environmental standards, the kinds of standards that we already observe here.  And to shut off the U.S. from those kinds of agreements isn’t just a missed opportunity, it actually puts the United States at a greater disadvantage because we’re hearing many of those countries indicate a desire to move forward with that agreement.

So that means that other countries who have signed on are going to be at an advantage over U.S. products, to say nothing of the role of the Chinese.  China would love to come and strike their own agreements with these other countries for the same reasons that we would like to -- because these are some of the fastest-growing economies of the world and they have a rapidly growing middle class that could be available to buy Chinese products.  And we know that if the Chinese negotiate a deal, they’re not looking to raise human rights standards; they’re not looking to raise labor standards; they’re not looking to put in place strict, tough intellectual property protections.

So the President is deeply disappointed that Congress hasn’t moved to ratify the Trans-Pacific Partnership because of the obvious benefits for the American people.  And that’s going to have consequences not just for our economy and the success that our country has in confronting the forces of globalization and looking out for the interests of working people, it’s also going to have an impact on our national security.

So obviously the incoming administration has proposed a different strategy when it comes to countering the forces of globalization.  I believe the President’s economic record speaks for itself.  And all of you will have an opportunity to test just how -- well, whether or not the strategy put forward by the incoming administration works and actually serves the interests of the American people, the American economy, and American workers.

Mark.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  Have there ever been days when you’ve dreaded coming out here?  (Laughter.)  Or let me put it another way -- have there been days when you didn’t dread coming out here?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  Let me answer your question this way.  There was -- I did the briefing here -- well, I did a briefing like this 354 times as Press Secretary --

Q    My count is higher.

MR. EARNEST:  Is it higher?

Q    Yeah.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the stenographers separated out the times that I briefed as the Principal Deputy Press Secretary, so that may account for the difference, but we can look at the numbers.

Q    I also counted gaggles.

MR. EARNEST:  They did, too.  I did almost the same number as both the Press Secretary and as the Deputy.

Q    I trust Mark’s number.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  That’s understandable.  That’s understandable.  In the 354 or so times that I walked into this room, I never took for granted the blessing that was the opportunity to stand here.  And most people don’t have an opportunity to influence the debate in this way.  The arguments that you hear me make, these are President Obama’s arguments.  This is his vision for the country that I’m advocating for.  So I’m not trying to take credit for that.

But these are arguments, and this is a vision for the country, and these are values that I passionately believe in.  And having the opportunity to influence the way that those arguments are made, to look for ways to deliver them in the most persuasive way that I can think of is an extraordinary intellectual challenge, but it also really gives me an opportunity to shape the debate in a way that few other people in this town have.

So there were days when I knew I was going to come out here and get some tough questions, and there were days when I was going to walk back to my office frustrated about how it went, but I never took for granted what an extraordinary opportunity it is to be a part of this process with you and to advocate for a President and a vision that I deeply believe in.  And I’m going to miss it.  It’ll be -- at the risk of oversharing, it’ll be hard to -- well, let me say it this way -- (laughter) -- it’ll take some getting used to, to seeing somebody else stand up here doing it.

Q    Or not.

THE PRESIDENT:  Or not. (Laughter.)  And -- but that’s --

Q    Are you going to watch?

MR. EARNEST:  I’ll probably watch.  I’m interested in what happens in here, and I think it’s important for the country.  And I’ll be paying attention.

Q    Marlin Fitzwater used to say that after he left that job, he used to love putting his feet up, pouring a glass of wine, and watching someone else face all the questions.  (Laughter.)  Is that how you think you’ll be watching your successor?

MR. EARNEST:  There may be a time or two when schadenfreude creeps in.  But look -- again, I’ve got enormous respect for the work that all of you do and for the conventions that we have erected to engage in this discussion, and it’s been an honor to be a part of it.  And yeah, I’m interested in what happens here, and I’ll continue to follow it.  But I will be relieved to not have the burden to follow it as closely as this job has required over the last two-and-a-half years.

Go ahead, JC.

Q    It’s sort of a personal question and it follows up, I hope, on what Mark was saying.  The President alluded earlier that you could possibly have a career on the silver screen.  (Laughter.)  Many of us -- I believe that.  Keep smiling -- that’s it.  Perfect.  And we know that you’re not going to require your very patient wife, Natalie, and your son, Walker, to pepper you with tough questions every day between 1:00 and 3:00 in the afternoon.  But to follow up, where is your passion going?  What would you like to do?  And where do you want to follow your dream?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’ll tell you that I’ve had this conversation with the President.  And one of the challenges of the job is it is all-consuming.  It’s difficult to remember a day in which the first thing that pops into my head when I open my eyes in the morning -- usually in the dark -- was to wonder what I needed to get done in order to prepare for this briefing, or to fulfill my responsibilities at the White House.

So I’m looking forward to having a little bit more time and space, both physically and intellectually, to reflect on this experience and to consider what the future might hold.  But I honestly don't know.

Q    Will you keep us posted?

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah, I’ll keep you posted.

Mark.

Q    Yes, just to clarify two quick things.

MR. EARNEST:  Sure.

Q    The clemency petitions that have come in, you led us to believe last week that there would be a round, some size, of additional clemencies before the President leaves?

MR. EARNEST:  Yes.

Q    That is still the case, correct?  Whatever size they are.

MR. EARNEST:  What I can tell you is that the work on this issue continues, and I certainly wouldn’t rule out additional announcements before noon on Friday.

Q    The President considers this still an important part of his legacy.

MR. EARNEST:  Absolutely.  Absolutely.

Q    And the President’s plans on Friday -- I know you don't want to go into detail about it -- but we're right in calling this a vacation, correct?  He’s not planning to go out and do speeches right away and meetings and stuff like that.

MR. EARNEST:  That is correct.  The President will not be working when he arrives in Palm Springs.

Q    Perhaps a fair amount of putting and other things?

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah, and I’m sure that many of you will be disappointed you won’t have the opportunity to tag along.  (Laughter.)

Scott.

Q    Is the First Family going to be staying in rental housing?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't know where they're going to be staying in Palm Springs, and I doubt we’ll announce it in advance.

Q    And you're leaving your office on Thursday afternoon or evening, but will you and your team will have control of the emails and Twitter and WhiteHouse.gov up until noontime?

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, there is a plan in place to effect that transition at noon on Friday.  I’m not sure exactly how they're going to do that.  But it’s part of -- it’s one of the reasons I have so much admiration for my colleagues who are more technologically inclined than I am.

John.

Q    Thanks, a lot, Josh.  Congratulations on your 354th briefing, or whatever that number is.

MR. EARNEST:  Thank you.

Q    Given all of your experience in this briefing room, can you talk a little bit from your perspective about the advantages of coming out to the James S. Brady Briefing Room to talk to us on a regular basis?

MR. EARNEST:  This is a place that's recognized immediately around the world as the place where announcements at the White House are made.  And again, the symbolic value of this podium in this room in front of all of you is powerful.  And it sends a strong message not just to the American people, but to people around the world about what the White House is doing, what the President is focused on, what his priorities are, and how he’s seeking to advance our interests.

So again, I think that there are a lot of common-sense logistical reasons to preserve the kind of access that all of you have to the West Wing.  But I wouldn’t overlook the important, symbolic value that makes the arrangement that we have in the United States rather unique.

Q    As far as statements, which are regularly put out by your office, I didn't notice a statement in regards to the death of Gene Cernan, the last man to walk on the moon.  Was that an oversight?  Can you talk a little bit about his contribution to our country?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I obviously read some of the news coverage about Mr. Cernan’s death.  And he certainly falls in the category of American hero, somebody who risked his life in the earliest days of the American space program to do remarkable things and inspire the American people to reach for great heights -- reach for great heights.  And obviously, our thoughts and prayers are with his family today and those how loved him.

I can't speak to why there wasn’t a presidential statement.  But certainly the President and First Lady made note of his death and are remembering him along with some of the other Americans who were inspired by his courage.

Richard.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  On behalf of the foreign press, I also want to thank you.  You've been helpful but very welcoming.  And all of us, we benefited from your openness so much.

MR. EARNEST:  Thank you, Richard.

Q    You have to know that all this has been very much appreciated.

MR. EARNEST:  Thank you.

Q    Knowing that there are also many auto plants in Canada, I would like your reaction to the President-elect's comment or intention on imposing a 35 percent tax on German cars being built in Mexico and sold in the U.S.

MR. EARNEST:  Richard, I think this is a pertinent question.  The President, on his last trip to Canada over the summer, talked about this very issue.

The U.S. auto industry is part of an integrated global supply chain.  And the presence of a lot of those suppliers for U.S. automakers is actually in Canada, and it speaks to the important ties between our two countries.  And maintaining those robust ties is good for the economy in both our countries; that if you shut down the supply chain or you shut down the trade between the United States and Canada, you’re going to cut off the American auto industry from the global supply chain in a way that’s going to have direct and negative consequences for American businesses and American workers.

That’s a real problem.  And I think it is an illustration of why President Obama has chosen a different strategy that actually seeks to ensure that other countries, including Canada, are living up to the kinds of high standards that are set here in the United States and were codified in the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  Canada, of course, was part of those negotiations and signed onto the deal.

So the President has spoken out about this at some length.  He certainly does believe that the strategy that he has advocated is the right one, but the incoming President has some different ideas in mind.  And we’ll have an opportunity to assess whether or not his strategy is going to work.

Jean.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  You have worked hard as White House press secretary.  I deeply appreciate you.

MR. EARNEST:  Thank you, Jean, I appreciate that.  That’s very kind.

Q    Can I follow -- ask a question.  After you -- whatever -- you go out the White House, can I also ask on those issues?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m sorry, say one more time?

Q    Can I follow up on the North Korean issues -- continue --

MR. EARNEST:  Well, there will be somebody else in the White House who will be setting policy with regard to the United States’ relationship with North Korea.  And I am hopeful there will be somebody else who is here answering your questions, but I certainly have enjoyed the opportunity that you and I have had to discuss this critically important national security priority of the United States.

Q    Thank you very much.  On THAAD missile issues.  Last week, incoming administration (inaudible) and South Korean national security agency director agreed to deploy THAAD missile in South Korea.  On this regard, China continues to threaten retaliation against South Korea for THAAD issues.  What can the United States do about Chinese actions?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the United States has made clear that the deployment of a THAAD battery to South Korea would be focused solely on countering the missile threat that emanates from North Korea.  South Korea is an ally of the United States of America.  We are duty-bound to defend them.  And President Obama has made clear, and I think the tens of thousands of U.S. troops that are on the ground in Korea right now make clear, that we’re going to live up to that promise.  And the deployment of a THAAD battery in South Korea would enhance our ability to do exactly that.

We’ve explained that to the Chinese at the highest levels, and we’ll continue to go to great lengths to help them understand exactly what we are trying to do.  And I know that that is something that is taking place not just at the presidential level, but I know that there have been some conversations through diplomatic channels, military channels to try to ease the concerns of the Chinese that this is an effort that’s focused on North Korea and not on having any impact on China’s capabilities.

Q    And one more thing.  Recently, high-level diplomat -- North Korean defector, Thae Yong-ho, from UK -- he has testimony, and he said that North Korean Kim Jong-un will (inaudible) nuclear weapons, and that he also said that it is a waste of time for Six-Party talks to (inaudible) the North Korean nuclear weapons.  Do you think we still need Six-Party talks?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I haven’t seen the specific comments of the defector that you cited, but I can tell you it’s the United States’ policy that the United States is prepared to engage with North Korea diplomatically when they make clear a commitment to a set of principles, including denuclearizing the Korean Peninsula.  And we’ve made that clear, and that policy hasn’t changed.

Let's do a couple more here.  John.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  And despite differences on things, thanks for your graciousness to me and always helping me on answers, and especially helping some friends of mine when they wanted some things in the White House.

MR. EARNEST:  You’re welcome, John.  I’ve enjoyed the opportunity to work with you, as well.

Q    Thank you.  Questions are twofold.  First, David Horowitz, the author, has come out with a book entitled “Big Agenda,” in which he says that Donald Trump has an agenda to repeal or roll back 90 percent of the executive orders and executive actions that President Obama took in his eight years in office.  Your reaction to that?  And do you think that’s possible to actually do?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t heard of the book that you’re referring to.  What I can tell you is that President Obama has often made the argument that there’s a difference between campaigning and governing.  And I know that the incoming President made a lot of promises about all of the executive actions that he was going to repeal, but when he’s responsible for governing the country, he will have to reconcile those promises with the impact -- the negative impact that following through on those promises would have on the country.  That may end up altering his decision to follow through, but ultimately those will be decisions for him to make.

And it’s why you heard me on many occasions express a preference for working with Congress to try to institute policy that would be good for the country.  But we ran into a brick wall of opposition when it comes to Republicans when they took power in 2011, and so we didn’t pass as much legislatively as we would have liked to have done.  But the President did use his executive authority to advance our country’s interests and to advance the agenda that he was seeking to implement.  And the incoming President will have to determine how much of that he wants to roll back.

Q    And I’ve been dying to ask this all day -- all week, actually.  Two former press secretaries to presidents have gone on to run for elective office after they left the podium up there, both unsuccessful.  Would you ever consider relocating to your home state, the “Show Me” state of Missouri, where they do need some fresh Democrats -- I don’t think you’ll argue about it -- (laughter) -- and run for office yourself?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I can tell you is that I know that there are a lot of talented young Missourians who are Democrats who should not be overlooked.  And I’ve certainly been in touch with some of them, and I think there’s a bright future for Democrats in Missouri, but at this point I’m not planning to be one of them.

Jared.

Q    Josh, over the weekend the President-elect told the Washington Post that he is supporting insurance for everybody, health insurance for everybody.  Is this a plan that the President -- said he’ll support something that’s better than Obamacare?  Is that enough to whet his appetite?  Or does he need more information?

MR. EARNEST:  Jared, the President -- I can tell you that President Obama looks forward to somebody calling his bluff.  The President spoke on live, national television, in primetime, looked directly into the camera and said that he will advocate for policy, even if it’s put forward by Republicans, if it will cover more people and more effectively lower costs than even Obamacare has.

So the President stands by that promise.  And according to what the President-elect promised to The Washington Post, it sounds like we might get a chance to see whether or not he’s calling that bluff.  The best way to cover everybody, and I think the only way that anybody thinks you can cover everybody, is through a single-payer plan.

So it’s unclear, I think, exactly at this point exactly what the incoming administration’s plans are.  It does not appear that, according to some reporting that I saw, that even their nominee to be HHS secretary is clear exactly what their plans are.

But the President made that commitment, and he’ll stand by it.  And I assure you that there are few things that would make him happier in his post-presidency than to have the incoming administration call his bluff, because this is an issue that he feels strongly about.  And as he himself has said, there’s no pride of authorship here.  If there are improvements that can be made on Obamacare, he won’t hesitate to support them.

Q    And I know that you haven’t given us information about the frequency or duration or readouts of the calls between the President and the President-elect, but I want to ask, looking forward, once he’s on vacation after Inauguration Day, then-former President Obama, what’s the level of his unpluggedness, and will he be available if there’s a call from the Commander-in-Chief?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what is certainly true of former presidents is they have a unique perspective on the burden and challenges that are assumed by the incoming President.  And as President Obama said the day after the election, he’s rooting for the incoming President to succeed in uniting the country.  And if there’s an opportunity for former-President Obama to assist in that effort, I’m confident that wherever he is, he’ll take the call.

Lalit.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  I join in thanking you on behalf of the foreign press for working with us.

MR. EARNEST:  You’re welcome.

Q    And in fact, the first foreign pool was done when the President invited Indian Prime Minister in November of 2009, and since then we are having (inaudible).  In the first briefing that the President -- the press secretary did in 2009, the main foreign policy topic was the situation in Afghanistan and Pakistan.  (Inaudible) was not.  But my question is, there are still 10,000 troops left in Afghanistan.  Does the President regret that he hasn’t recalled all the troops from there?  And had the situation been different, had Pakistan been more helpful in eliminating terrorist safe havens from their territories?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, with regard to Pakistan, obviously, the United States has an extraordinarily complicated relationship, particularly when it comes to national security, with Pakistan.  There are some areas where the United States and Pakistan have been able to effectively cooperate to counter terrorism and to fight extremism, and that’s served the interests of both countries.  And obviously, tragically, Pakistan is a country where many victims of terrorism have been claimed.

And the President certainly is interested and is hopeful that the next administration will be able to deepen that cooperation with Pakistan, because it wouldn’t just enhance security in Pakistan; it actually would make the United States safer, too.

With regard to Afghanistan, I think this will be the kind of issue that historians spend a lot of time looking at when evaluating President Obama’s presidency.  What President Obama promised to do when taking office was to refocus our attention on the threat from al Qaeda that emanates in the Afghanistan-Pakistan region.  And President Obama put in place a strategy, working closely with his national security team, at the State Department and the intelligence community, and, of course, the Department of Defense.  And over the course of several years, in part relying on some new capabilities, succeeded in decimating core al Qaeda that previously menaced the United States from hideouts in the Afghanistan-Pakistan region.

That is a major accomplishment, and it’s an accomplishment that has made the American people safer.  But the threat in that region of the world has not been eliminated, and there continue to be a smaller number of U.S. servicemembers keeping us safe, engaging in counterterrorism operations in Afghanistan.

They’re also working closely with thousands of troops from our NATO partners who are also there doing the same thing.  And I know there has been a question raised about how important a role NATO has played when it comes to counterterrorism.  You have to look no further than Afghanistan to assess just how valuable a contribution that they have made to that effort.

So the situation in Afghanistan continues to be one of concern, and I think the President would acknowledge that this is an area where we’ve made important progress that has made the American people safer, but there’s still important work to be done in this region of the world, and this is a responsibility that the incoming President will assume.

Q    And the President visited India twice; no other President had in the past.  And he has met with Prime Minister Modi both times.  What kind of relationship the President would like the new administration to have with the largest democratic country in the world?

MR. EARNEST:  President Obama did make strengthening our ties with India a genuine priority.  The President believed that that served our economic interest and our national security interest, and that would certainly explain the frequent visits of both Indian Prime Ministers during President Obama’s tenure in office to the White House, and it would explain President Obama’s visits to India as well.  And each of those visits was oriented around a discussion about how to deepen our economic ties in a way that has positive benefits for workers in both our countries, but also to look for ways that we can work more effectively together to fight extremism and to enhance the security of citizens in both our countries.

And President Obama certainly believes that we have made important progress in deepening and strengthening the relationship between two of the world’s largest democracies, and is hopeful that that progress will continue under the next administration.

Francesca, I’m going to give my Kansas City girl the last one.  (Laughter.)

Q    Thank you.  I truthfully was going to ask first, what the heck happened with the Chiefs the other night?  (Laughter.)  I’d like to know the answer to that.

MR. EARNEST:  Unfortunately, it’s just the latest in a long string of heartbreaking playoff defeats for the Kansas City Chiefs.  So there’s always next year.

Q    While endeavoring to keep it light here at the end, I apologize if you said some of this earlier, there was a little bit of a commotion at the beginning of the briefing --

MR. EARNEST:  There was.

Q    Did you say how long the President and First Lady will be staying in Palm Beach?  Is this like a quick trip or --

MR. EARNEST:  Palm Springs.

Q    Sorry, sorry, Palm Springs.  Gosh, not Palm Beach -- that’s the other President.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  I did not say how long they’re going to stay.  They will arrive on Friday afternoon in Palm Springs, but I don’t anticipate having any updates on their travel schedule beyond then.

Q    And you said the First Family -- so the daughters will also be going on that trip as well?

MR. EARNEST:  That’s my understanding.  And we’ll confirm that for you on Friday.

Q    Is there a possibility that perhaps, immediately after that, they’ll go back to Chicago?  When they were there the other day, they didn’t stay overnight -- hadn’t visited the home.  Is that potential in the docket?  Trying to get one last week ahead here out of you.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah.  I guess this is one of the benefits of ending the presidency on a Friday, is I don’t anticipate that there will be any more weeks-ahead.  The President and the First Lady and their family are looking forward to getting out to Palm Springs and beginning to relax a little bit, but I don’t have any updates on their plans beyond that.

Q    And then one final question.  We always assumed that the book the President was writing was a memoir.  Is it possible that he’s writing the next great American novel?

MR. EARNEST:  If he is, he has not told me that, but I think for a variety of reasons we’re all eagerly anticipating how President Obama chooses to devote his time after leaving the White House.

So, thank you all.  It’s been a genuine pleasure.  (Applause.)

2:15 P.M. EST
1:18 P.M. EDT
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Nice to see you all, including some familiar faces.  (Laughter.)  I do not have any announcements at the top so we can go straight to your questions.

Josh, do you want to start?

Q    Sure.  Thanks, Josh.  The President described -- I should clarify, President Obama described his meeting with President-elect Donald Trump as “excellent.”  I was wondering if you could tell us if there was anything specific that President-elect Trump told the President about how he plans to govern this country that led to President Obama’s characterization of it that way.

Q    Well, Josh, I had an opportunity shortly before coming out here to visit briefly with President Obama about the meeting -- and there are many details of their discussions that they’ll keep between the two of them.  A couple of things that I can share with you -- obviously, the President indicated during the pool spray that they had an opportunity to discuss some foreign policy and some domestic issues.

Some of those foreign policy issues came up in the context of the President’s upcoming trip overseas.  The President described to the President-elect some of the issues that he expects to come up with some of our allies and partners and other world leaders that he’ll meet with on the trip, and so it was an opportunity for them to talk about some of those issues in advance of the President’s trip and in advance of some of the conversations that he expects to have with world leaders on the trip.

There also was an opportunity for the two leaders to talk about staffing and organizing a White House.  That’s complicated business.  And any White House is expected to be structured in a way to deal with multiple challenges, or even multiple crises at the same time.  And the President-elect indicated a lot of interest in understanding the strategy of staffing and organizing a White House.  And obviously that’s something that President Obama has thought about extensively during his eight years in office, and they spent a large portion of the meeting discussing the importance of properly staffing up and organizing a White House operation.

But, look, other than that, what the President heard from the President-elect is a clear commitment to the kind of effective, smooth transition that President Obama has been vowing to preside over for the better part of a year.  And the President intends to make good on that promise in the 70 days ahead.

Q    Did the President leave the meeting any more reassured that President-elect Trump will not try to dismantle all of the work that you and your colleagues have done over the last eight years?  And did President Obama make any pitch to Trump, for instance, not to get rid of Obamacare or other significant policies?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, I’m not going to get into all the details of their meeting.  I think that President Obama came away from the meeting with renewed confidence in the commitment of the President-elect to engage in an effective, smooth transition.  That obviously is what President Obama believes serves the American people the best.  We are committed to doing what is required on our part to make sure that that happens.  And the President was pleased to hear a similar commitment expressed by the President-elect.

Q    Do you know if the President got any reassurances from Trump about whether he plans to pursue what he discussed during the campaign about trying to incarcerate Hillary Clinton?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I’ll let the President-elect sort of read out his end of the conversation.  But as I mentioned yesterday, the President found reassuring the kind of tone that the President-elect conveyed in his election night remarks.

As I mentioned yesterday, these were remarks that the President-elect delivered not just to his supporters in the ballroom, but to the citizens of the country that were tuned into this historic election, but also to people around the world.  And given the intensity of scrutiny of his remarks, it’s notable that he chose that kind of tone.  I think we saw a similar tone just in the Oval Office 30 minutes ago, where he was indicating his commitment to working closely with the outgoing administration to ensure a smooth, effective transition.

That doesn’t mean they don’t agree on all the issues.  They obviously have deep disagreements.  But what they do agree on is a commitment to a smooth and effective transition, and that’s a good thing for the country.

Q    President-elect Trump talked about looking forward to receiving President Obama’s counsel in the future and meeting more times.  Did they agree to meet again?  Were there -- something put in place where they’re expected to continue the conversation they had in an additional format?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware of any additional meeting that’s been scheduled, but I wouldn’t rule out future consultations. Obviously, when President Obama served -- over the last eight years, President Obama has benefitted from the kinds of conversations that he’s been able to have with previous Presidents.  And I wasn’t surprised to hear that President-elect Trump indicated that he feels like he would benefit from those conversations over the course of his presidency as well.

Roberta.

Q    Was it awkward at all?  Given all the rancor that the two men exchanged versus each other on the campaign trail and even before that, was the meeting awkward at all in terms of getting past that?  Was there a moment where they had to sort of break the ice and get past that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, to be as specific as possible about this, Roberta, there was no staff in the room when President Obama and President-elect Trump sat down in the Oval Office for 90 minutes.  So I think that’s probably a question you’d have to ask the two of them.

I feel confident in telling you that they did not resolve all their differences.  I also feel confident in telling you that they didn’t try to resolve all their differences.  What they sought to do was to lay the foundation for an effective transition from the Obama presidency to the Trump presidency.  And this administration, at the direction of President Obama, has been preparing for this moment and this meeting for the better part of a year.

And this obviously was an important early step, having the President sit down with the President-elect to discuss that transition.  And based on the kind of agreement that was evident about the priority that they both place on a smooth transition, it sounds like the meeting might have been at least a little less awkward than some might have expected.

Q    And you said that it was just the two of them alone, there was no staff in there?

MR. EARNEST:  That's correct.

Q    For the entire time?

MR. EARNEST:  That's correct.

Q    And the pool waiting to go into the Oval had seen some other officials, Denis McDonough among them, on the South Lawn. I'm just wondering if you could tell us a little bit about what other officials from the White House may have met with -- who was in those sort of discussions going on at the same time.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I know that the President’s-elect spokeswoman, Ms. Hicks, was here.  I had an opportunity to meet with her -- to meet her, I guess I should say -- while the President-elect was meeting with President Obama.  You noted that -- she also had longer meetings with some other members of -- some of my colleagues in the communications team.  You noted that Mr. Kushner was here and had an opportunity to visit with the Chief of Staff.

Those are the only staffers from the President’s-elect team that I had an opportunity to meet today.  There may have been some others that were with him, but I can't speak to all of the meetings that took place.

I will just clarify that there is a more formal process that we would expect would guide the interactions between the President’s team and the President’s-elect team for the two months between now and the inauguration.  There will be a formal process for that kind of consultation to ensure a smooth transition.  The kinds of conversations today were much more informal in nature.

Q    President-elect Trump mentioned that he learned about some high-flying assets, and I'm just wondering if you know what he was referring to when he talked of that.

MR. EARNEST:  I'm not sure what he was referring to, but you can check with his team on that.

Michelle.

Q    So you're saying as far as “excellent” goes, he’s talking about a smooth transition and having a good tone -- I mean, that's all that “excellent” means?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think when you consider the profound differences between the two gentlemen, when you consider the fact that they have never met before in person, and when you consider the high priority that the President places on a smooth and effective transition, I think that qualifies as excellent.

Q    I mean, Donald Trump mentioned that this was originally supposed to only last 10 to 15 minutes.  Is that true?  And why would it go on so much longer than that?

MR. EARNEST:  The President had allotted more time on his schedule for that meeting than just 10 to 15 minutes.  But they did end up spending about 90 minutes, talking about a range of issues, including what I described to Josh earlier, and I think that would be an indication of a pretty robust, valuable meeting.

Q    So yesterday you talked about the President still having deep concerns, obviously, and that everything he said on the campaign trail about Donald Trump was true.  This meeting -- I mean, considering all of that, it was a brief meeting -- did it do anything to assuage any of those deep concerns?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, as I mentioned yesterday, the President campaigned vigorously across the country making a forceful case in favor of the candidate that he supported.  And he did that right up to the night before Election Day.  But on Election Day, the ballots were counted and the American people decided.  The President was never in a position to choose a successor; the American people chose the successor.  The President vowed to work with whomever the American people chose.

So, no, they did not recreate some sort of presidential debate in the Oval Office today.  They were focused on doing the work of the American people, fulfilling their institutional responsibilities.  And on President Obama’s part, that means laying the groundwork so that the incoming President-elect can hit the ground running.  After all, as President Obama said in the Rose Garden yesterday, we're all rooting for his success when it comes to uniting and leading this country.

Q    So the President still has his deep concerns, then, is what you're saying?

MR. EARNEST:  What I'm saying is that the forceful case that the President made on the campaign trail leading up to Election Day reflected his authentic views about the stakes of the election and about the candidate that he went all in to support.

Q    Obviously there was nothing in this meeting that would change any of that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess what I'm saying is that the meeting was not convened to try to resolve the variety of concerns that President Obama had raised on the campaign trail.  The meeting was focused on the transition, and it went well.

Q    Okay.  And given that some of Trump's advisors have, just prior to this meeting, talked about looking for all of the ways -- or wanting a list of all of the ways that they could roll President Obama's policies back, starting on day one, does the President fully expect that to happen?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I'm not going to prejudge what their transition process is.  Obviously, our goal is to make sure that the incoming President-elect can hit the ground running and can enjoy success when it comes to uniting and leading the country.  That's what the President promised yesterday.  Convening a meeting in the Oval Office today is part of making good on that promise.  How they choose to use the time and what priorities they choose to set for the earliest days of the Trump presidency is something that you'll have to ask them.

Q    What does the President expect to happen now?

MR. EARNEST:  I think the President's expectation is that the incoming President will set his own priorities and pursue them accordingly.  And again, our goal is to provide him the kind of advice that would give the President-elect and his team the opportunity to succeed in uniting and leading the country.  That's what he has indicated that he has made his priority, and we certainly are prepared to do everything we can over the next 71 days to support him in that effort.

Q    Well, does the President now have any reason to believe that Donald Trump is fit to be President of the United States?

MR. EARNEST:  Again, the two men did not re-litigate their differences in the Oval Office.  And we talked about them quite a bit in here leading up to the election, and we're on to the next phase now.

Justin.

Q    You mentioned a formal process, so I guess I wanted to ask if there are meetings that have either occurred or are being set up with senior staff here at the White House since Donald Trump won the presidency, especially national security or economic teams going forward?

MR. EARNEST:  My understanding, Justin, is that the broader formal process has not yet commenced with meetings.  There were a number of meetings between White House personnel and members of both candidates' transition teams in the months leading up to the election.  And I know there have been a number of consultations with the President’s-elect team and the White House team.  But the formal meetings I don’t believe have started just yet.

Q    I wanted to ask about, I guess, press access today.  The meeting with the Vice President and Vice President-elect Pence was closed press, which is a break from past precedent.  And Carol reported that the Obamas cancelled a photo op.

MR. EARNEST:  That's not true.

Q    Okay.  Can you talk about, then, why we didn’t have a photo op in the way that we had them in previous administrations, and why there's no press access, and particularly if this is --

MR. EARNEST:  Well, first of all, Justin, you just were in the Oval Office with the President of the United States and the President-elect, so it's not accurate to say that there was no press access.  But let's just be clear about what's happened.

Over the last eight years, I've enjoyed the opportunity to have many of you in my office over the years advocating for greater access to the President and the work that he's doing in the Oval Office.  And what that typically means is you coming in and advocating for the opportunity to see the President of the United States sitting in the Oval Office, photograph him sitting next to the person that he's meeting with, and then hear from both people about the meeting.  That's the priority that has been conveyed to me in countless meetings with all of you over the last eight years.

That is exactly what was provided today.  That was not provided in 2008.  I wasn’t part of designing the press access for 2008, so I can't account for all of the reasons for that.  But the press access that we put together today was based on the guidance that we've received from all of you over the last eight years about what the priority is.  And we were pleased to be in a position to provide that today.

It is an indication of the commitment that we have to transparency, and it is an indication that the President has to building public confidence in the shared commitment to a smooth and effective transition.  What better way for the American public to understand that the President and the outgoing President of the United States share a priority of a smooth and effective transition than to allow you all into the Oval Office to hear them talk about their commitment to that effort.

Q    And one way to demonstrate that you guys are committed to the, I guess, effective transfer of power would be to show the Vice President or show the First Lady welcoming their successors into the White House.

MR. EARNEST:  But I think we would all just agree that that would be lower in priority than what was provided today.  And what was provided today is unprecedented in terms of the kind of access that was granted to previous White House press corps.

So, look, there's always going to be this back-and-forth.  As I've stated before --

Q    Josh, the reason that this is relevant, and the reason that I'm asking the question is, while the President has come out and sort of put on a cheery face, we know obviously many here are disappointed.  The First Lady spoke passionately about how she found Donald Trump to be an unacceptable choice.  So are we to read anything -- or even putting aside whether we should read anything, is the reason that there wasn’t press access to either of those events because the First Lady or Vice President didn’t want to be photographed or appear alongside --

MR. EARNEST:  Absolutely not.  In fact, I am not aware that the First Lady's office was consulted about the press arrangements for today.  I certainly didn’t consult with them.
What we can do is we can go back to the White House photographer and see if there are any photos from the greet so that you all can get some insight into how that went.  So we'll follow up with you on that.

Q    Last one.  A number of foreign governments from top allies of the United States -- Turkey, the United Kingdom, Canada, Mexico -- have all said that their leaders have been in communication with President-elect Trump over the last 24, 48 hours.  Beyond sort of congratulatory calls, is there a concern among you guys, as you're trying to pursue your foreign policy agenda over the next two months -- that allies could be getting mixed messages on the U.S. -- the United States' foreign policy goals?

MR. EARNEST:  I'm not aware of any concern about that.  It is not uncommon for countries that have important relationships with the United States for them to call and offer their congratulations to the President-elect.  Some of those conversations are facilitated by the State Department.  In other cases, you've got foreign governments that are going directly to the President-elect's office.  And that's consistent with past practice, and I'm confident that that happened in 2008 after President Obama's election as well.

Olivier.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  First, I'm kind of curious about the President as HR professional.  Does he say, you need to get a great Chief of Staff?  Does he say, there's this one job you never, ever heard of, but it's vital?  Or is it just -- obviously, Donald Trump knows he's got to staff the White House. So how much precision is the President offering in his recommendations?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I'll be honest, I didn’t have a detailed conversation with President Obama about this.  But knowing how he has approached these issues himself, I think that he has built an organization at the White House with an eye toward surrounding himself with capable people and putting them in positions where they are given the authority that they need to make decisions.  Also he's ensured that they are given the authority that they need to elevate decisions to him if they need to be.  So structuring the organizational chart effectively is not an insignificant matter when you're talking about life and death decisions that have to be made on a regular basis in this building.

The President will be taking some questions over the course of the next week, and maybe somebody can seek greater insight from him on that.

Q    And looking overseas to the operations against the Islamic State, the President recently sent 1,700 more American troops there.  You've long insisted that they don’t have a combat mission.  These are combat troops.  Why did they go?  I mean, are you saying that they needed 1,700 more American troops' worth of advice and assistance?  I mean, we're starting to see some social media of Americans who look like they are in front-line operations, not in supportive ones.

MR. EARNEST:  Olivier, what we've made clear is that our servicemembers, when they go to Iraq, they are trained for combat, they are equipped for combat because they need to defend themselves in a dangerous country, but they are not given a combat mission.  And that is an important distinction, because the President does not believe that American troops should be in a situation in which they are expected to be at the tip of the spear to go and take and hold ground.  The idea of the U.S. military being an occupying force in Iraq is not one that has yielded success for our country.  It's not made our country safer.

So what the President envisioned and the mission that they have been given is a dangerous one.  It's one in which American servicemembers are asked to assume great risk so that they can be in a position to, in some cases, train Iraqi security forces; in other cases, so that they can offer advice and assistance as Iraqi security forces undertake important military objectives.  There are even some situations where if some of those trainers or advisors end up in a dangerous position, then there are additional U.S. forces that are mobilized to get them out.  This is dangerous work.  And this does put them in harm's way.  And it does put them in a situation where, occasionally, they have to use their combat training and their combat equipment to defend themselves.

But that is much different than being in a situation in which they are asked to take and hold territory.  That's a different strategy and it's a different mission.  Both of them are dangerous.  Both of them require courage and professionalism and skill and sacrifice.  And that's what we have seen from our men and women in uniform.

Q    I get your point about occupying, but the kinds of troops you're sending now are actually the kinds of troops that take ground and hold it, at least briefly.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I recognize that the servicemembers that President Obama has sent to Iraq do have extraordinary combat capabilities.  They've got extensive training.  They've got the kind of combat equipment that you would see in a theater of war that you would expect our servicemembers to have when they're operating in a dangerous place.  But the mission that they have been given is different than the mission that they were given by President Bush that involved occupying a foreign country.  That didn't work out well. And President Obama believes that we need to try a different strategy, and that different strategy is yielding important success.

In Iraq alone we've already taken back more than 50 percent of the occupied populated territory that ISIL previously held.  Now, with the support of these advisors and trainers and other U.S. forces that are offering assistance, Iraqi security forces have isolated Mosul and are beginning the important, painstaking work of ejecting ISIL from Mosul.  So we're making progress, based on the strategy that the President has put forward.  This is a strategy that requires our servicemembers to assume great personal risk.  But it is a strategy that is yielding progress and making America safer.

Jon.

Q    Josh, what is the President's message to the thousands and thousands of people across the country protesting this election?  Some of them carrying signs saying "Not my President."

MR. EARNEST:  Jon, I think the first thing the President would say is that we've got a carefully, constitutionally protected right to free speech, and the President believes that that is a right that should be protected.  It is a right that should be exercised without violence.  And there are people who are disappointed in the outcome.  And the President's message in the Rose Garden was it's not surprising that people are disappointed in the outcome, but it's important for us to remember, a day or two after the election, that we're Democrats and Republicans, but we're Americans and patriots first.

And that's the message that the President hopes that most people will hear.  But are there some people who are going to be disappointed, and are they going to express those views in public?  I think we've seen that that's the case.  They have constitutional rights to do that, and those rights should be protected.  But the President would obviously want them to hear his message as well.

Q    Given that all that's been said, were you surprised to see Donald Trump or hear Donald Trump say that the President is a "very good man" who he respects?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, I think the kind of tone that we heard from the President-elect in the Oval Office today is consistent with the kind of tone that he used in his remarks on Election Night.  And that's the kind of tone that you heard President Obama welcome in the Rose Garden.  And it certainly is something that the President was pleased to hear.

Q    He did say he would seek the President's counsel and there would be many, many more meetings.  Is President Obama open to meeting again with President Trump, including after he -- when he becomes President Trump?

MR. EARNEST:  Of course.  Look, the President has benefitted from the kind of consultation that he's had with former Presidents.  And President Obama is determined, as he mentioned yesterday, to do as much as possible to ensure that President Trump can have some success in uniting and leading this country. As President Obama himself said, he's rooting for his success as he takes on the important work of uniting the country after a divisive election, and leading our country forward in a way that's consistent with the best interests of many generations of Americans.

Q    And I know you said they didn't re-litigate the campaign, but I just want to ask you what the President's thoughts are.  he said just on Monday that Donald Trump is “temperamentally” -- he said on Monday, “Donald Trump is temperamentally unfit to be Commander-in-Chief,” “uniquely unqualified.”  Does he still believe that?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, the President’s views haven’t changed.  He stands by what he said on the campaign trail.  He had an opportunity to make his argument.  He made that argument vigorously.  He made that argument in states all across the country.  But the American people decided.  The election is over. The President didn’t get to choose his successor; the American people did.  And they’ve chosen President-elect Trump.  And President Obama is determined to preside over a transition that gives the incoming President the opportunity to get a running start.

Major.

Q    Pick up on Justin’s line of questioning -- the President assured President-elect Trump that he would do everything he can to make a swift and sure transition.  Did he ask of President-elect Trump to have his backing for anything he may do on foreign policy while he’s still President?  Get assurances from him that there would be no criticism either through back channels or publicly of what he’s still trying to accomplish while he retains the power of the presidency?

MR. EARNEST:  I didn’t ask the President if he sought that kind of assurance from the President-elect so I can’t say for sure what was discussed in the Oval Office.

The thing that I am sure of is that everybody understands that we’ve got one President at a time.  And President Obama is President of the United States until January 20th, and he will exercise the authorities of the office consistent with his view about what’s in the best interest of the country.  On January 20th, it will be the President’s-elect turn to assume that awesome responsibility.

Q    And there’s no anxiety on the part of the President that the President-elect doesn’t understand or appreciate that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I think you’d have to talk to the President’s-elect team about whether or not he would object to the principle that I’ve just laid out.

Q    Okay.  The Russian government said today that there were contacts between it and the Trump campaign and the Clinton campaign during the course of the campaign.  Does the White House find any reason at all to be concerned about that, or would that fall under the category of normal embassy communications with two campaigns of which -- one of which may become the next President of the United States?

MR. EARNEST:  I can’t speak to the nature of those conversations, obviously, so it’s hard to judge them in the abstract.

Q    -- the conversation that went on during the campaign, does this raise any higher level of anxiety or alarm?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, what I know based on my own personal experience is I know that there were -- when President Obama was running for President that there were occasions where members of his team did consult with representatives of other governments.  I don’t think there’s anything inherently nefarious about that. But, again, I can’t speak to the content of the conversations that may have occurred, so I don’t think I can pass judgment one way or the other.  But I don’t think there’s anything inherently nefarious about it.

Q    The President-elect mentioned that some difficulties on the foreign policy stage were discussed.  Did the President go into that meeting wanting to convey anything in particular about what’s going on in Mosul, what’s going on in Iraq, and perhaps convey some information that the President-elect might either not be aware of or not sufficiently appreciate?  Because I don’t need to tell you, Josh, in the last two weeks or longer, the President-elect was describing what was going on in Mosul as something approaching an abject disaster, which I know is not your interpretation or the Pentagon’s interpretation.

MR. EARNEST:  Right.

Q    Did the President feel obligated or go into this, wanting to say, well, here’s some stuff you might want to know because you’re going to inherit where this is come January 20th?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President did feel obligated to touch on some important foreign policy priorities, and I know that the ongoing campaign against ISIL in Iraq, and in Syria, for that matter, are important foreign policy priorities.  I don’t know to what extent that was discussed, but this is obviously something that President Obama is following closely.

Q    Thanks, Josh.

MR. EARNEST:  Ron.

Q    You said that the President stands by everything that he said on the campaign trail about Donald Trump, the President-elect.

MR. EARNEST:  That’s right.

Q    Then he must -- the President must be very concerned about the future of the country.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, the President, right now, is concerned on the most important institutional priority that he has right now, which is presiding over a smooth and effective transition.

Q    But again, if he still feels this way about the President-elect, he must be concerned about the future of the country beyond this transition.

MR. EARNEST:  Look, Ron, the President had an opportunity to make a very forceful case in public in states all across the country in support of the candidate that he endorsed.  The American people chose someone else.  And he’s committed to working with that person, the person that he did not support, to ensure a smooth and effective transition.

There is a long tradition in our democracy of Presidents effectively doing that because they have a responsibility to put their own political views aside and perform the functions of the presidency.  And one of those functions is to ensure a peaceful, smooth and effective transition, because America is going to do its best when its Presidents are performing at its best.  And President Obama is determined to do everything that he can to allow the President-elect and his team to hit the ground running.

Q    I think I understand that.  But the question is, after this transition, what does the President intend to do to -- is he going to become something of an opposition figure?  Is he -- he's got to be concerned about the direction the President-elect has said he's going to take the country.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think as all of you have heard, the President’s plans to take a long vacation after he leaves office have not changed.  And I assure you that he's looking forward to that as much as ever.  But over the longer term, I don’t have any commitments to make on the part of the President.

One thing that I can share with you is something that I've heard him say I know in private -- I assume that he said this in public, too -- which is just the idea that he deeply appreciated how President George W. Bush, after leaving office, gave the new President some running room, gave him a little space, wasn’t backseat-driving in public, offering up all kinds of critiques with every single decision that President Obama was making in the earliest days of his presidency.  I'm confident that President George W. Bush didn’t agree with every single decision that President Obama was making, but he was extraordinarily respectful of the democratic process.  President Obama admired that.

But, look, I can't make any promises now for what exactly President Obama will do once he leaves office.

Q    During the next seventy-some-odd days, is there a strategy that the White House has, that the President has, to try and preserve and protect certain aspects of what he has accomplished here?  What are the priorities?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the first priority is ensuring the smooth and effective transition.  But there's also the priority that the President places on making sure, as the Chief of Staff likes to say, that we run through the tape; that the President and his team use every moment that's remaining to do the work of the American people and to effectively implement the kinds of policies that President Obama has prioritized over the course of his presidency.

Q    What are some of those priorities now?  Given the change in administration, given the fact that Donald Trump has won the presidency, what specifically is the focus?  What are the priorities?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t know that I can give a comprehensive list, but some of the priorities that come to mind are the kinds of priorities that actually would be in place regardless of the outcome of the election.  Whether or not Mr. Trump had emerged victorious from the election, we would be focused on the implementation of the Affordable Care Act and maximizing the opportunity that currently is available to millions of Americans to go to HealthCare.gov during the open enrollment period and sign up for health care.  For those individuals that already have health care, they have an opportunity to go to HealthCare.gov and shop around.  Many of them will find that there actually is a comparable health care plan available that will cost them less money.

So making that a priority is something that we would do regardless of who had won the election.  But that certainly is a very high priority right now.

Obviously, when it comes to counterterrorism and homeland security, that's always a priority.  That was true before the election and that certainly is true after the election.  And we certainly wouldn’t want any of our adversaries to be confused about the fact that America might somehow be uniquely vulnerable in the midst of this transition.  That’s not true.  This administration is strong, and our homeland security efforts are as vigorous as they've ever been.  And we're going to continue that effort.

You made reference -- or someone made reference to -- or Major made reference to the ongoing work against ISIL in Iraq and in Syria.  The United States is leading a coalition with 67 partners to degrade and ultimately destroy that terrorist organization.  There are some consequential decisions that have been made recently by leaders on the ground both in Iraq and in Syria to focus on the significance of the strategic objective of defeating ISIL in their two declared capitals in Iraq and in Syria.  And that effort is underway.  That's dangerous business.  But it's a high priority, and it stands -- if successful, stands to advance our objectives and make the American people safer.

So those are three priorities.  Those are at the top of everybody's mind around here.  And the truth is that would be the case regardless of the outcome of the election.

Q    And just lastly, this was the first time these two men met.

MR. EARNEST:  That's correct.

Q    There's that old cliché, first impressions are a lot.  What was his first impression of Donald Trump?

MR. EARNEST:  I didn’t ask him that question before I came out here.  So, again, maybe when the President takes questions you guys will have an opportunity to ask him about that.  But we'll keep you posted on that.

But, look, the overriding impression -- I don’t know if it was the first one -- but the overriding impression is his positive assessment about the commitment of the President-elect to a smooth and effective transition by our teams working together.  That's going to maximize the likelihood that we'll achieve that objective.

Carol.

Q    Donald Trump's advisor on Israel said today that the President-elect doesn’t view settlements as an obstacle to peace, which is obviously a different position than the President has.  And the President had been looking at perhaps doing something on this issue before he leaves office, just to put it in a different place than it is now, on a trajectory to -- so eventually the next President can be able to have talks.  Is he considering doing something like that still?  Or is he of the view that at this point, when you have a President-elect taking steps like that when you have such big, wide disagreements it's not the proper thing to do?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, my first reaction is that the concern that you've heard President Obama express about the expansion of settlements is not just the policy of this administration, it was actually the policy of previous Democratic and Republican administrations who expressed concerns about that.  The view is that trying to change facts on the ground only puts a negotiated settlement, a resolution of differences between the two parties farther away.  So the President views that kind of continued settlement expansion as counterproductive.  And again, that's consistent with the policy that Democratic and Republican Presidents have expressed.

More generally, I don’t have anything to preview with regard to any additional steps that President Obama may consider before leaving office.  The principle that we have articulated is that it is really important for the Israelis and Palestinians to sit down in the context of face-to-face negotiations and resolve their differences.  And President Obama has expended enormous effort -- Secretary Kerry has probably expended more effort than anybody else -- to try to bring those sides together.  And thus far, those efforts have not yielded the kind of progress that we'd like to see.  But our belief that that's the only way that those differences will be resolved continues to be true.

Q    What about the broader -- does the President have a philosophy on just that issue?  When you have a President and a President-elect who differ so much on significant foreign policy issues, does he believe that now is the time to not take steps that would be at odds with what the next President might want to do for Guantanamo Bay, for instance, or other things?  What's his general view on that?

MR. EARNEST:  His general view, Carol, is -- again, and I think this is the view of outgoing Presidents in both parties -- which is that there is one President at a time.  And President Obama has the authority of the office of President until January 20th, and he will make decisions consistent with his view about the best way to advance the interests of the country.

In the afternoon of January 20th, that awesome responsibility will be transferred to the President-elect, and then he will be given that awesome responsibility.  And in this interim transition period, what President Obama has committed to is doing our best to coordinate and communicate with the President-elect's team.  But when it comes to exercising that authority, that authority rests solely with President Obama, until January 20th.

April.

Q    Josh, a couple of questions.  One, did you get any kind of readout from the First Lady's office about her meeting with soon-to-be First Lady Melania Trump?

MR. EARNEST:  I did hear from them.  The First Lady hosted Mrs. Trump in the private residence of the White House for some tea and a tour of the private residence.  Part of that tour included stepping out onto the Truman Balcony.  I think all of you have heard both the President and First Lady talked about the quality of time that they've spent on the Truman Balcony, and Mrs. Obama took the opportunity to show it off to Mrs. Trump.

There also was an opportunity for the two women to walk through the State Floor of the White House with the White House Curator, Bill Allman.  And some of you have had an opportunity to visit with Mr. Allman.  He is essentially a walking encyclopedia of knowledge about everything at the White House.  And so Mrs. Trump had an opportunity to hear from him.  They also had a discussion about raising kids at the White House.  And obviously the First Lady's two daughters spent the formative years of their childhood here at the White House, and Mrs. Trump's son will also spend some important years of his childhood here at the White House.  And that's a rather unique childhood.  And the two of them had an opportunity to talk about that experience and being a good parent from that experience.

And then after their tour concluded, the First Lady and Mrs. Trump walked over to the Oval Office, and the two couples visited again before they departed.

Q    So the First Lady and Mrs. Trump walked over there after the press left?

MR. EARNEST:  That's correct, yes.

Q    And then the next thing -- going back to Justin and the historic pictures of the transition, I recall when George W. Bush was President-elect, and then-President Bill Clinton walked him down the Colonnade to the Oval Office, and press were there.  I remember years ago, when George W. Bush and Mrs. Bush -- Laura Bush -- then-First Lady Laura Bush greeted the then-President-elect, Barack Obama, at the Diplomatic Room door.  And they also did the walk.

What happened?  I mean, I understand you said you wanted us to see them more -- you wanted to give us more access.  But the precedent has already been set for those kind of walks and pictures to happen.  What happened this --

MR. EARNEST:  Well, we went over and above the precedent by providing access to the Oval Office.  You and I have talked about this many times over the last eight years, that the priority that you place is getting access to the Oval Office and hearing directly from the President and the person that he's meeting with about the meeting that just occurred.

That didn't happen in 2000, when President Clinton welcomed President-elect George W. Bush to the White House.  That didn't happen in 2008, when President Bush welcomed President-elect Obama to the White House.  I'm not criticizing the two previous administrations or the two previous White Houses; I'm merely stating that the access that was provided by this White House is entirely consistent with the kind of requests that we've been fielding from all of you over the last eight years.

Q    And just -- I hate to beat this to death, but just understanding that initial picture of the initial meeting, on the arrival, to see the body language -- a picture speaks a thousand words.  The first glances, the first moments speak a thousand words.  And that's what we missed.  And I guess that's what we're talking -- I guess that's what we're talking about.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I understand that.  We'll consult with the White House photographer and see if there are any photos that he was able to capture of that moment and share them with all of you.  And it certainly is not just your right, but your responsibility to advocate for more access, and I respect that.

Q    Lastly, can you give us the construct of what it looks like when a former President counsels a current President?  I know that Bill Clinton counseled George W. Bush and, as you said, that this President has taken the counsel of other Presidents.  What are some of the issues that he's received counsel on?  And what does that look like, if you can tell us that?

MR. EARNEST:  We've gone to great lengths to keep that kind of consultation private.  That consultation between Presidents and former Presidents is private.  And there's a special bond that people who have assumed this awesome responsibility of leading the greatest country in the world have.  And so they have unique and sensitive conversations that we just can't provide much insight into other than to tell you that they have occurred not just with Presidents in the same parties -- President Obama didn't just consult with President Clinton, but has had useful, warm, supportive conversations on a variety of topics with Presidents in both parties.

And I guess the best example I could give you would be of President George H.W. Bush.  You've heard the President I believe speak in the past about how much he's valued those kinds of interactions.  And I don't want to leave you with the impression that they've had dozens of phone conversations in the last eight years, but on those opportunities that President Obama has had to visit with President George H.W. Bush, Bush 41, the President has come away with enormous respect for his service to the country and for his wisdom about what's required to lead the country.

So that's just one example.  And obviously, the relationship between President Obama and President Clinton is one that benefitted President Obama enormously.  And over the last several years, you all have seen firsthand the kind of relationship that exists between President George W. Bush and Laura Bush and the President and First Lady.

So these kinds of relationships are important.  And if that extends into the next presidency, President Obama is committed to doing his part to trying to provide the kind of counsel that he's benefitted from over the course of his presidency.

Q    Okay, you say a variety -- he's talked to Presidents -- former Presidents on a variety of topics.  Is it domestic policy, or foreign policy, or just the history of it all when it comes to certain issues?

MR. EARNEST:  It's both.  Some of it's dealing with the demands of the office.  These are the kinds of things that are part and parcel of a conversation between somebody who is bearing an enormous burden and somebody who has dedicated a significant portion of their previous life to fulfilling the same task.

Q    And he would be open to doing -- when he is President, when is number 45, he would be open to do it at any moment?  Donald Trump?

MR. EARNEST:  As I mentioned -- and I guess I would say this principle applies not just during the transition, but even after -- that President Obama believes that -- well, President Obama will be rooting for the President-elect to succeed in uniting the country and in moving our country forward.

Christi.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  First you said that you met with Hope Hicks, and then you said you met her.  Did you --

MR. EARNEST:  So Ms. Hicks had an opportunity to actually have a meeting with my colleagues, Jennifer Psaki and Liz Allen, the Communications Director and Deputy Communications Director here at the White House.  While she was in that meeting, I had an opportunity to go and introduce myself and visit with her just briefly.

Q    So did you guys have a chance to talk about what it’s like to do your job, or --

MR. EARNEST:  No, I did not have that conversation with her. But I will certainly have that conversation with the person that the President-elect selects to succeed me once he’s made that decision.  But I didn’t have that conversation with Ms. Hicks and I don’t have a sense of who the President-elect may have in mind.

Q    And also, I asked you this yesterday, but maybe you know a little bit more today, about what the President’s message will be to foreign leaders when he goes overseas.

MR. EARNEST:  I didn’t have a detailed conversation with him about that.  The President was interested in making sure that the President-elect was aware of the kinds of conversations that are scheduled over the course of the next week.  But foreign leaders understand the same principle that I described earlier, which is that President Obama will be President of the United States through January 20th and he will exercise all of the authorities of that office until then.

But in this transition period, the President is interested in making sure that the incoming President has insight into the kinds of conversations and issues that he will inherit on the afternoon of January 20th.

Q    So will he be reflecting to those foreign leaders any of his impressions of his -- of the President-elect based on today’s conversations?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I wouldn’t preview the conversations at this point.  But after those conversations have occurred, we’ll do our best to read those out to you and give you a sense of how those kinds of conversations -- I will just affirm that I’m confident that this will be a subject of the discussion that he has with every world leader when he travels next week.

Q    Yesterday you said that the President would reassure allies and partners of the steadfast U.S. commitment.  Does he still plan to do that?

MR. EARNEST:  The President will offer his reassurance to our allies that the -- historically, the United States of America, even across political parties, has been committed to not just upholding but also seeking to strengthen the alliances that we have with countries around the world.  The view of Democratic and Republican Presidents has been that the robust health of those alliances makes America safer.  And Presidents in both parties have been committed to investing in those alliances, and that certainly is what’s happened in the past.

I’ll let the President-elect and his team discuss what their plans are for some of those alliances, but certainly our allies should understand President Obama’s view and should understand the history -- the longstanding history in this country about the way that we not just maintain but actually advance our alliances around the world.

Julie.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Just following up on that, first of all, is that a case that he made to -- the President made to Donald Trump during their Oval Office meeting when he talked about how the trip would unfold?  Did he talk about the importance of valuing these alliances, and not withdrawing from them, and honoring what the tradition has been on that front?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t know how detailed a conversation they had about the priority that President Obama places on our alliances.  I know that the President was interested in ensuring that the President-elect was aware of the conversations that were scheduled, and the President wanted to give him some insight into the kinds of issues that he expected would come up in those conversations.  But more than that, I don’t have much more insight into their conversation I can share.

Q    Just more broadly -- during the campaign, the President spoke often about how serious of a job the presidency is, what it’s like to sit in the Oval Office and make decisions, and criticized Mr. Trump for, in his view, not having that kind of approach that was needed to be President.  Did he give him any advice during this meeting?  Did he talk to him about that issue and how he needed to step up, or anything he needed to do differently in order to succeed in the job that he has now?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the fact that they spent so much time discussing the organization of the White House I think should be an indication that the President-elect takes seriously the important responsibility that he's been given.  And I think that's also -- I think that's something that we can also conclude based on the kind of tone that we've heard from the President-elect in the two statements that he's delivered since the outcome of the election was announced.  But I think more generally you'd have to talk to the President-elect for his view on this topic.

Q    There’s organization and human resources and personnel, and then there's how you comport yourself, and whether you take seriously the office of the presidency, which is something that the President has said in the past he doesn't believe that Mr. Trump is capable of.  Did he give him any advice or pointers on how he might --

MR. EARNEST:  I'm not sure if they discussed this specific topic or not.

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Can you just -- you may have touched on this -- is it true that the President-elect is now receiving the two daily intelligence briefings over the transition?

MR. EARNEST:  What I can tell you is that the intelligence community has made those briefings available.  I don't know whether the President-elect, the Vice President-elect, and their national security designees have actually received the briefing. You can check with them about that, though.

Q    Let me ask you about Obamacare, the Affordable Care Act.  Is it the President's position that Americans who currently take advantage of the Affordable Care Act needn't be worried about its demise upon the ascension into the office by President-elect Trump?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, first of all, we've got some good news on the Affordable Care Act today.  Yesterday was the highest -- or I guess I should say the best day of the open enrollment period thus far.  Yesterday, more than 100,000 people selected plans at healthcare.gov.  That's an indication of the intense demand for the kinds of insurance offerings that are available to people at healthcare.gov.  So that's an indication of the success of the program when you consider the intense demand that people have for these services and for these opportunities that aren't available other places, and are only available because of the Affordable Care Act.

That said, the President himself has acknowledged that there are some things that we could do to strengthen the program further.  Things like expanding access to tax credits that would reduce health care costs for more Americans.  In some cases, if we got more states to expand Medicaid -- again, this is providing health insurance to low-income Americans, paid for almost entirely by the federal government -- doing so would put downward pressure on the premiums paid by everybody.  That would be a good outcome.  And certainly finding ways to overcome the politically motivated objections of Republicans who have blocked Medicaid expansion in their states would be good for the law.

Q    Absolutely.  But I guess what I'm getting is, are those who are using Obamacare whistling past the graveyard, knowing that the President-elect will have the Congress and the power to essentially repeal it?

MR. EARNEST:  No, they're not, because these are benefits that are available to them today.  And we certainly would encourage people to sign up and capitalize on the good opportunity that's there.  For the vast majority of people who do sign up, more than 7 in 10 of them will be able to sign up for a health care plan for $75 a month or less.

Q    So you're saying, I'm not concerned in any way, and you're telling the American people, you shouldn't be concerned in any way that Obamacare, the benefits that you receive under Obamacare will be going away anytime soon?

MR. EARNEST:  What I'm saying is that the President-elect is going to make his own decisions.  And worries about those future decisions should not have any impact on anybody capitalizing on the opportunities that are available to them today at healthcare.gov.

Q    Let me ask about the Electoral College.  There's been some sort of conversation -- we certainly heard this said in 2000 -- some have said, well, one person received the majority of the votes, maybe it's time to do away with it.  Usually you get that from the side that lost.  What's the President's view of the Electoral College?  Is it time to give it a fresh look?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I am not aware of any constitutional reform proposal that the President has put forward.  But, look, this is our system and this is a system that has been in place for a long time.  Everybody knew the rules before the race started, and everybody campaigned accordingly.  There's a reason that the candidates and their surrogates spent so much time in states like Florida and North Carolina, where those were states that have a lot of electoral votes and where the polls indicated that the race was going to be very close.  So everybody executed a strategy consistent with their knowledge of the rules.  Nobody changed the rules at the end.

As has often been discussed, a reform proposal like the one that you're hinting at would have a pretty significant impact on the strategy that people put forward.  It would encourage candidates to actually spend more time -- or, at least, it would provide an incentive for some candidates to spend more time in those communities where they know they have the most supporters. So you can imagine Democratic candidates spending more time doing rallies in places like Northern California and New York City, where Republicans, on the other hand, might spend more time in places like New Orleans and Dallas to try to drive up the turnout and maximize the kind of turnout from their supporters.

So there are consequences for putting forward those kinds of reforms and there are some pros and cons.  But, look, the fact that Secretary Clinton won the popular vote on Tuesday is indicative of the strong support across the country for her candidacy, for the agenda that she put forward.  And the President is hopeful that 58, 59 million Americans who got involved and were engaged in support of her campaign don't linger too long on the disappointment about the loss of their candidate and will actually seize the opportunity to remain engaged in our political debate our country will benefit from.

Q    I know you don't have any scheduling updates at the moment about the President may be talking about TPP on the Hill. Is it time that he continued to get over there and maybe rally the troops and see if something can get done here in the lame duck?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, the President did have a conversation with Leader McConnell yesterday, and I know that he's been working to schedule a conversation with Speaker Ryan.  I don't know that that's occurred yet, but we'll keep you posted on that.  But certainly the President and his team are in touch with leaders in both parties on Capitol Hill about the important work that needs to get done before the end of this year.

Q    Do you have a count?

MR. EARNEST:  I'm sorry?

Q    Do you have a count?

MR. EARNEST:  Not one that I've seen publicly, but you can check with the vote counters on Capitol Hill about that.

Q    Last one -- Gitmo.  I ask you pretty much weekly.  I think the number is less than 60 now, according to my last update.  Any readout on the possibility that that number will be dropping below, say, 50 in the next week or two?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don't have any predictions at this point.  But obviously we're continuing to do the important diplomatic work of transferring those individuals that had been determined by a review board that they can be safely transferred under a set of restrictions to other countries.  I don't have any upcoming transfers to preview, but I can confirm for you that if any transfers are made, we will announce them publicly.

Sarah.

Q    Josh, the First Lady took a little bit of an unprecedented role on the campaign trail this last cycle.  Does she see herself in having a role in sort of projecting this sort of smooth transition of power attitude?

MR. EARNEST:  She doesn't have any sort of vested constitutional responsibility that relate to a transition.  I think what you saw today was a gesture of hospitality to the incoming First Lady.  Mrs. Obama has talked before publicly about the stresses and anxieties of moving to a new place, living inside a fishbowl, living inside a museum, and raising your family there.  And I'm sure that Mrs. Trump is feeling many of those same anxieties as she prepares to move herself and her family into the White House.  And so the courtesy that Mrs. Obama extended is rooted in her own experience of going through this difficult transition.

Q    And I'm just a little confused -- when you and the President say that you hope Donald Trump is successful, given that the President has said that he sees Trump as having the potential to undermine democracy, undermine American ideals,  wouldn't it be fair to say that you don't want him to be successful?

MR. EARNEST:  That's a good question, Sarah.  The point that I made -- and I tried to be precise about this -- is that the President's view is that our country benefits when we have a President who succeeds in helping the American people understand our collective interests.  And that's why the President has talked about his hope that President Trump will succeed in uniting the country.

There are some profound political differences that were revealed by this election, and our country will be better served if we can try to bridge that gap.  It doesn't mean we're going to agree on everything.  And it doesn't mean that President Obama is now endorsing every policy proposal that the President-elect vows to pursue.  Their differences remain.  Their differences are profound.  But our country succeeds and our country does best when we have a President who is succeeding in uniting and leading the country.  And that's what the President is hopeful for.  And the President -- the current President is going to do his part to try to give the incoming President every advantage as he seeks to do that.  And that is, after all, the message that we heard from President-elect Trump on Election Night.

Q    Did the birther issue come up at all during their meeting?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  I'm not aware that it did.  I'm not aware that it did.

George.

Q    Thanks.  Speaking of the fishbowl, as the new team looks to name its press secretary and communications director, what advice would you give them generally on press relations and, specifically, on pools?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me just stipulate that I'm not sure they're going to be that interested in all that much advice from me.  And that's okay.  I stand ready to provide whatever advice is sought.  The first thing I'd tell them is that you guys are a bunch of softies.  (Laughter.)  I wouldn't say that.  Unfortunately, that's not true.

What I would tell them is that they have a responsibility to communicate with the White House Press Corps.  The White House Press Corps has a critically important, constitutionally protected function to hold people in power accountable.  And that’s something that you and your news organizations devote significant time and resources to.

There’s also a lot of expertise in this room.  There are a lot of people in here who have covered many different White Houses, and that historical perspective is something that benefits your ability to describe to the American people just what’s happening here.

And I guess the last thing -- there are a lot of other things I would say to them.  The last thing I’ll say to you about what I would say to them is that it’s hard to read things in the media that are critical of you.  It’s hard to read things in the press that are critical of things that you deeply believe in and that you’ve been working day and night to advance.  And so there’s a natural tendency I think to recoil and to write off people who disagree with you as people who are not worth talking to.  And that is a natural human tendency and temptation.

And my advice to the incoming team would be to not give into that temptation; that the kinds of conversations that I’ve had with all of you -- everybody who is sitting in this room has, on many occasions, written things or broadcast things about the White House that I didn’t agree with, that I didn’t think were fair, that I didn’t reflect -- thought reflect the kinds of priorities that we’ve established or accurately reflect what we’re trying to do.  But those stories never got better by ignoring your emails or ignoring your phone calls, or telling you that you’re not allowed to come in my office anymore.

That’s never happened.  The way to try to change your view or to try to influence your reporting is to make a case to you on the merits.  And you can’t do that if you won’t pick up the phone, and you can’t do that if you won’t return an email.

And so that’s the philosophy that we have pursued here.  I’m sure there will be plenty of people who will say that -- on your side who will say that we didn’t do that enough, or maybe that we did it too much, and we’re open to that kind of second-guessing. But that’s the strategy that we have pursued.  I think that strategy has served President Obama well, but, most importantly, I think that strategy has served the American people well for helping them understand what we’re doing here.

After all, if you believe as deeply and as strongly as I do about what we’re doing, then you should be interested in having an opportunity to make that case to the American public, because it’s likely to persuade people.  And that’s the approach that we’ve taken, and I think the President and the American people have been well served by it.

Q    And on the pools?

MR. EARNEST:  On the pools, look, having a pool of reporters follow you around everywhere you go is inconvenient, occasionally annoying, and takes a long time to get used to.  But it serves an important purpose.  And this White House has gone to great lengths to coordinate with all of you as you organize that effort, and I would recommend that the incoming administration do the same.

Alexis.

Q    Josh, can I just ask two quick follow-ups and one question?  In response to your answer to Major’s question, you may remember that in the transition from George W. Bush to Barack Obama, the Commander-in-Chief briefing -- or talking to the incoming Commander-in-Chief had three things on his mind, classified things that he wanted to personally brief incoming President Obama on.  Did President Obama today use this opportunity to do something similar with President-elect Trump, to talk about classified things related to being Commander-in-Chief, or international policy, and use today as that venue for that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, President Obama did use this occasion to talk about some important foreign policy priorities.  I don’t know the extent to which those conversations would be classified, in part because I didn’t hear them.  So there was important information that was discussed, but I don’t know where they would rate on the classification scale.

Q    Following up on Julie’s question, did the -- because there was this reference to “high-flying assets,” which might have been Air Force One or some reference to the perks that come with the White House.  Did the President take a moment to even make reference to the value of an encrypted smartphone?

MR. EARNEST:  Oh, I don’t know to what extent they talked about personal communications devices, but presumably they will.

Q    Third question is, the President is still the titular head of the Democratic Party.  To what extent will he weigh in on the leadership questions that the DNC is facing?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, having moved to Washington D.C. in 2001 for the first time, the Democratic Party was facing a similar question -- because when there’s one party that’s in the White House and that same party controls Congress, it elevates the position of the chair of the DNC.  So it’s an important decision.

I don’t know to what extent President Obama will weigh in on it.  As I recall from 2001, that was a race that was hotly contested and closely covered by the news media, and I would anticipate that candidates for that position will covet the endorsement of the outgoing President.  I don’t know to what extent he’ll have one to offer, but we’ll keep you posted on all of it.

Andrew.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  My question goes back to the issue of press access and pools and so on.  I mean, you spoke about -- glowingly about press access and all that the White House has done to encourage that.  Why, then, did the President tell the President-elect not to answer shouted questions?

MR. EARNEST:  I think he was making clear that he’s not obligated to do so.  But obviously, the President-elect, if he wanted to answer those shouted questions, he could.

President Obama on many occasions has chosen to answer those questions.  On many more occasions, he’s chosen not to.  And I think that tradition is something that he was communicating to the President-elect.

Victoria.

Q    The President-elect, at the beginning of the -- the bottom of the meeting when we saw him, he was fidgeting a little bit and the tenor of his voice was a little nervous for him.  He seemed, frankly, awed after 90 minutes with the President.  Can you characterize how he seemed?  Because he seemed gobsmacked.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  I was standing behind the pool in the Oval Office while they both spoke, so you all had a better view of him than I did.  And I was -- frankly, at the beginning of their comments, I was focused on what President Obama was saying.  I wasn’t reading any body language.

Q    You don’t have any sense of his affect?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t.  I don’t.

J.C.

Q    Speaking about the smooth transition in terms of cooperation, coordination, and maybe intelligence and insight, might you envision the President and Mr. Trump as they build their relationship that started today -- that there will actually be a conversation in terms of the President’s insight on some of the world leaders that Mr. Trump is going to have to deal with in the next two months.

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, they don’t have any additional meetings that are on the books right now, but I wouldn’t rule out future meetings.  And again, if President-elect Trump were interested in President Obama’s counsel about his communications or his relationship with some foreign leader, I’m confident that President Obama would not hesitate to share it.

Cheryl.

Q    Thanks.  A CR expires December 9th.  Does the election change any of the strategy on finishing the spending bills for this year, or are you just going to do a CR --

MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me answer your question first by saying, no, that we have consistently advocated for Congress fulfilling its responsibility to pass budgets that give agencies in the federal government certainty about the budget picture.  That’s particularly true when you’re talking about the kinds of commitments that are made by the Department of Defense and our intelligence communities that expend significant sums of money to keep us safe.  And just funding them two or three or four months at a time is not a smart way to do it.

So we’ll engage in conversations with Capitol Hill, and President Obama has already done that with the Republican leader, to talk to them and to urge them to fulfill their basic responsibility to pass the kind of budget that would provide some certainty to military, national security and other federal government officials that have important responsibilities.  The President believes it’s important to give them certainty so that they can make longer-term decisions with confidence.

Q    So just the reverse of that real quick, have you heard from Capitol Hill on whether they agree with that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I’ll let members on Capitol Hill express their own view, but there have been a number of conversations, mostly at the staff level, about this and other topics that relate to the work that Congress must get done before the end of the year.

Q    Josh, given the statement of Trump, et al, that they want to revoke Obama executive orders as soon as they can, has that in any way put the brakes of any anticipated executive orders?  And do you still have a stream of them that’s expected between now and January 20th?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have anything to say about upcoming executive orders other than to tell you that I’m not aware that any of our plans in that area has been affected by the outcome of the election.

Q    Do you expect a lot more commutations between now and the end?  Because there seems to have been a very concentrated effort to deal with people in prison for long drug-related terms. What was the forecast on that?  And is this a part of Obama’s legacy that can’t be taken away, as you see it?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President has made this a priority and the President does believe that there are some injustices that can be corrected using his clemency authorities.  And he’s done that with respect to a certain classification of convictions more than the last 10 or 11 Presidents combined.

So I do think that’s an important part of his legacy.  He would much prefer that his legacy include the passage of criminal justice reform legislation that would be much more effective in addressing some of the widespread inequities that leaders in both parties have identified.

Unfortunately, that has not happened.  I don’t know if Congress will get that done before the end of the year.  The President will certainly encourage them to try to do that.  And there is bipartisan agreement around this.  I can’t speak to the President’s-elect view of this priority, but obviously it’s one that President Obama and his team have invested deeply in.

I would expect additional commutations before the President leaves office.  But those are the kind of commutation decisions that have been in the pipeline even before the outcome of the election, and I’m not aware that the outcome of the election would have any impact on those clemency decisions.

Q    Is there any piece of legacy legislation that you think you can get passed before he leaves office?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, that’s what -- we’ll be having some conversations about that.  So we’ll see.

Francesca, I’ll give you the last one.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  Let me start by saying I appreciate you pointing out that in 2000 and in 2008, that reporters didn’t have access to the Oval Office meeting, because some of us were not there at that time to remember that.  I appreciate you pointing that out about the Oval Office access meeting.  I think what we’re trying to understand is what the thinking behind not allowing reporters to be on the South Lawn today was, what the thinking was behind that and why that happened?

MR. EARNEST:  The idea was just that we wanted to provide you the best access that we could.  And the best access that all of you have consistently advocated for, for the last eight years, is access to the President and the person that he’s meeting with in the Oval Office with statements in front of the full pool.  And that’s exactly what was provided today.

Q    And what then, if anything, should we draw from the fact that we have neither heard from, nor seen the First Lady today?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, as I mentioned earlier, we’ll consult with the White House photographer -- presumably you guys have been able to do that already.  So we’ll try to expedite the release of a photo so that you can see that interaction.

But I can tell you that the First Lady enjoyed the opportunity that she had to welcome Mrs. Trump to the White House and to give her the tour that I described earlier, and to discuss the unique demands of raising a family in the White House.  And the First Lady was pleased to extend that courtesy to Mrs. Trump and enjoyed the opportunity that she had to visit with her today.

Q    And as far as the photos go, may we also possibly put in a request for some of the ones you described on the Truman Balcony?  I don’t know if a photographer was following them around then as well.  If there’s any photos like that you could possibly release that would be helpful, too.

MR. EARNEST:  We’ll see what we have.  I don’t know how closely the White House photographer was covering them while they were walking through the private residence, but we’ll see what we can do.

Thanks, everybody.

END
2:32 P.M. EST
1:20 P.M. EST

MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Happy New Year.  Hope you all got some quality time with your families over the last couple of weeks.  I know the President did while he was in Hawaii, and I hope you were able to do the same thing.

Before we get started, I actually wanted to mark a little -- a memory with all of you.  Today actually reflects the 9th anniversary of the President’s victory in the Iowa caucuses.  And I was fortunate enough to have worked on his Iowa caucus campaign, and so this is a day that I know that many of my colleagues at the time will mark in their own way.  I thought I would actually do it by reading just a couple of short excerpts from the speech that he delivered that night.

This was the President speaking to a group of very excited supporters.  There are some famous lines in this speech, but my attention, as I was reading this last night actually was attracted to a couple of different paragraphs -- and let me read them to you now.

“Years from now, you’ll look back and you’ll say that this was the moment, this was the place where America remembered what it means to hope.  For months, we’ve been teased, even derided for talking about hope.  We always knew that hope is not blind optimism.  It’s not ignoring the enormity of the tasks ahead or the roadblocks that stand in our path.  It’s not sitting on the sidelines, or shrinking from a fight.  Hope is that thing inside us that insists, despite all the evidence to the contrary, that something better awaits us if we have the courage to reach for it and to work for it and to fight for it.”

He went on to say that “Hope is the bedrock of this nation; the belief that our destiny will not be written for us but by us, by all those men and women who are not content to settle for the world as it is, but who have the courage to remake the world as it should be.”

I didn’t deliver that speech nearly as well as he did that night.  And I certainly --

Q    It was a dramatic read.

MR. EARNEST:  I tried.  I tried.  (Laughter.)  I gave it the old college try.  And I certainly can’t take credit for having written this powerful speech.  But I think it is an apt illustration of how remarkably committed President Obama has been over the course of his presidential career to a core set of principles that aspire to something great; that put their hope in the American people to build the kind of country that we all believe in, where we all have an opportunity to succeed regardless of what we look like or where we come from.

And there’s a reference in this to “those men and women who are not content to settle for the world as it is, but who have the courage to remake the world as it should be.”  The President was talking about all Americans who are committed to investing in this country.  But I have very vivid memories of the young men and women who signed up to work on President Obama’s campaign back in 2007 for the 2008 caucuses.  And I say young men and women because even back at the time, nine years ago, when I was at the ripe old age of 32, I was the old guy, and that our campaign was populated by young people -- not young people in their 20s and 30s, but young people in their 20s.

And I have a vivid memory of one fall afternoon -- it was in the middle of the week.  The Winneshiek County Democrats in Northeastern Iowa were hosting their fall dinner, and there were two Obama campaign organizers who were eager to have somebody from the campaign come and speak at the fall gathering for all the Democrats.  This was a prime opportunity to recruit supporters and other influential people in the community, particularly Democrats, to win over their support.

And the campaign, unfortunately, was not able to find anyone for them, so I went up there.  (Laughter.)  And so I made the more than four-hour drive from Des Moines, Iowa, to Decorah, Iowa -- Winneshiek County is in the northeastern part of the state.  And what I found there were two Obama campaign organizers, two young people who were utterly committed to the task.  It was this young woman from Tennessee and a young African American man.  And I point that out because I don’t think there are too many other people in Winneshiek County that either had a southern accent like that young lady did, or were African American like that young man.

But what I found in the few hours that I was in town with them is they knew everybody.  When I got there, I pulled into their office and they said, well, you must be thirsty after your long drive.  They said, let’s go down to the grocery store and we’ll get you something to drink.  And they were walking through the grocery store aisles greeting people by name, and greeting the clerk who was checking us out by name.  And we went to the county dinner, and it was a small affair at an outdoor shelter at a park in Winneshiek County, and they were greeting everybody by name.  And I remember that night after the dinner I took them out for a couple of drinks at a local bar, and they’re greeting the bartender and other people at the bar by name.

It was an indication of how these two people were so committed to the cause and so passionate that they mustered the courage to go to some place that they had never been, to a community where they were very obviously outsiders, because of the passion that they felt for President Obama and his vision for the future of the country.

So I appreciate you indulging me on the anniversary of the victory to talk about the warm memories that I have of this important event, not just in the history of the people who have supported President Obama over his career, but in the history of the country.  And to all of my colleagues and friends who worked on that campaign and are marking that day today, I continue to feel the sense of solidarity and comradery with them that was so critical to our victory nine years ago.

So with that long wind-up, Darlene, welcome back.  Happy New Year.

Q    Same to you.

MR. EARNEST:  And let’s go to some questions.

Q    Great.  So tomorrow, the President is going to the Capitol to talk to Democrats there about health care.

MR. EARNEST:  That’s right.

Q    What is the message?  What is the goal?  What does he hope to accomplish by going up there and meeting with them?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, this will be an opportunity for the President to meet with the Democrats in the House and the Senate for the incoming United States Congress.  And they’ll be there to principally discuss how to counter the stated Republican objective of repealing the Affordable Care Act.

The stakes are high.  And I know that, particularly at this time, when we’re thinking about -- when there’s a lot of discussion about the President’s legacy, that some people might think that, well, the President is very concerned about the political capital that he’s invested in this and he doesn’t want to see it all go away.  That’s certainly true.  But the President’s priority and the President’s motivation is rooted in looking out for the interests of the 22 *30 million Americans whose health care would be taken away if Republicans repeal the Affordable Care Act.  He’s interested in looking out for the millions of Americans who get health care through their employer who have seen that the growth in their health care costs has been sharply limited -- just 3.4 percent in 2016.

Overall, the growth in health care costs is the lowest it’s been on record.  And if Republicans repeal the Affordable Care Act, they will reverse that progress.  Millions of Americans across the country are protected from being discriminated against because they have a preexisting condition.  They’re allowed to keep their kids on their insurance plan until their kids turn 26. Women are not allowed to be charged more by their insurance company just because they’re women.  All of that would be undone if Republicans repeal the Affordable Care Act.

Obviously, we’re deeply concerned about the impact this would have on Medicaid and Medicare.  The Affordable Care Act extended the lifespan of the Medicare trust fund by 11 years.  So if Republicans repeal the Affordable Care Act, they’ll be hastening the demise of Medicare that millions of seniors rely upon for their basic health care needs.

So the President is deeply concerned about the impact that this Republican action could have.  He’s also concerned about this Republican tactic of repeal-and-delay that ultimately is nothing more than just bait-and-switch.  The prospect of, oh, don’t worry, the 22 *20 million Americans who have health insurance because of the Affordable Care Act, we’ll get around to offering up a replacement at some later date.  That’s not a responsible way to govern, and it certainly is not an indication that you’re looking out for working people in this country.

Democrats are, however, interested in looking out for working people in this country, no one more so than the Democratic President of the United States, Barack Obama.  So that’s what they’ll be there to talk about, and the President’s message will be to encourage them in that fight and to offer his own insight about the most effective way to engage in that fight.

Q    Is he going to be looking in some way to exploit Republicans appearing to be divided over what to replace Obamacare with?  Is that part of the discussion tomorrow?  Sort of take advantage of their inability to agree on a replacement?

MR. EARNEST:  There does appear to be some division in the Republican Party.  That's understandable.  Many of you have told the stories of people who are represented in Congress by Republicans, who voted for those Republicans, who are pleading with those Republicans not to take away their Obamacare.  So it's not surprising to me that there are some Republicans who are now a little queasy about the prospect of -- the impact that repealing Obamacare would have on their own supporters, on people in their congressional districts.  Because we know there are people all across the country who benefit from this law, who are protected by this law, whose lives have been saved by this law.

And the prospect of taking it away is a question of life or death for some people.  And so it's not surprising to me that that does leave some Republicans queasy.

What the President has long said -- and I'm sure that this is true of other Republicans on Capitol Hill -- I don't speak for them -- but the President has long been open to the idea that if there are Republicans who are genuinely interested in reforming the Affordable Care Act in a way that would strengthen the program the President would be strongly supportive of that effort.  And he’s put forward his own ideas for how we could do that, but he certainly would be open to ideas from Republicans to do that.

But that's not what Republicans have offered.  What they’ve offered more than 50 times is just a proposal for tearing the program down in a way that would leave millions of Americans vulnerable.  So there is this division in the Republican Party that does leave them vulnerable because they haven’t actually indicated any desire to work with Democrats to strengthen the program, which means that there is a premium placed on Republican unity, and if they’re not able to preserve that unity, it will pose a challenge to their efforts to accomplish this goal.

But there are a lot of steps to this process that Republicans have laid out that they’re prepared to undertake, and we'll see if they are able to do them.  The country would be much better served by them looking to work in a genuinely bipartisan fashion to strengthen the Affordable Care Act and not just extend, but actually strengthen the many protections that benefit millions of Americans across the country.

Q    Last one on this.  The President has said on a few occasions that his administration has been good on policy, but where it had fallen down has been in communicating policy to the public.  And I'm wondering --

MR. EARNEST:  I try not to take that personally when he says that.  (Laughter.)

Q    So I'm wondering if the trip up to Capitol Hill tomorrow and then this health care-related interview that he’s doing later in the week on Friday -- is this some sort of attempt to kind of do the sales job on ACA over or better?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, look, I don't think -- I think as you all have seen in covering the President over the last eight years, there aren't many do-overs.  I can't think of any.  So, no, this is not a do-over.  But I think this is an opportunity for the President once again to make what he finds to be a particularly persuasive argument about the benefits of the proposal.

And the one thing that we have long said that has proved to be true is that the more that people understand what’s included in the Affordable Care Act, the more that people see firsthand how they benefit from the Affordable Care Act, the more popular it's likely to be.

And there’s no denying that Obamacare has been subjected to hundreds of millions of dollars of political attacks -- many of them, if not most of them, false -- about the impact of the law. So there is stiff headwinds that we have encountered in trying to make the argument in favor of the Affordable Care Act.  But the one thing that has proved to be true is that the more that people understand what’s included in the Affordable Care Act and how they benefit from it, the more popular the program is and the harder it is for Republicans to build political support for tearing it down.

Jeff.

Q    Josh, North Korea has said it is close to testing an intercontinental ballistic missile.  As the Obama administration comes close to its end, what more can you do on North Korea in the remaining three weeks of the President’s term, and what kind of advice do you have for the incoming administration?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jeff, the most important thing that any Commander-in-Chief has to do is protect the American people.  And for years, the United States has -- at the direction of the Commander-in-Chief, President Obama -- has increased the defenses that are deployed in the Pacific region to protect the American people from this threat.

So there are radar facilities and antiballistic missile facilities that have been installed in places like Japan and Guam and in Alaska.  There are naval vessels, ballistic missile defense ships that are patrolling the Pacific Ocean.  The number of them has been increased as a result of a decision made early on by the Commander-in-Chief to make sure that we could protect the American people from this threat.  And I can confirm once again that the United States military does believe it has the capacity to protect the American people from the threat that's emanating from North Korea.

But these defenses are not the only steps that the Commander-in-Chief has ordered.  The United States is also engaged in a rigorous, intensive diplomatic effort to build international support for tough sanctions against the North Korean regime.  And the United Nations Security Council last fall passed the toughest resolution yet, imposing the toughest sanctions yet against the North Korean regime, putting a hard cap on the amount of coal that can be exported -- because we know that they use the revenue from those coal exports to try to fund some of these programs, so putting that hard cap in place is going to have an impact on their ability to continue to develop their programs.

And we're only able to succeed in implementing those measures with the cooperation of China.  And given the differences that we have with China on a number of other issues, it's no small diplomatic undertaking to get them to work effectively with us -- which they have, to their credit -- to impose some of these measures and to increase pressure on the North Korean regime.

The problem has not been solved, but we certainly have defenses in place to protect against the threat that emanates from there.  And we certainly have made progress in building important diplomatic support to apply pressure to the North Korean regime to limit their ability to continue to develop this program, but also to give them an incentive to change their strategy.  They haven’t yet, but we're going to continue to apply that pressure.

Our advice to the next administration I think will largely be to listen to the advice of our military commanders about what’s necessary to protect the American people with regard to our deployments in the Pacific, and to look for opportunities to work effectively with countries like China and Russia and our allies -- South Korea and Japan -- to apply pressure to North Korea to make clear that they should renounce their nuclear ambitions and put an end to the kind of destabilizing rhetoric that we've seen all too often emanate from the North Korean capital.

Q    Thank you.  And on a separate issue.  The White House’s reaction to the congressional Republicans’ decision to curtail and then not curtail the Office of Congressional Ethics today -- is this one of those perhaps rare instances where you agree with President-elect Trump?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, first of all, I think that it is rather revealing that the first step taken by congressional Republicans in the new Congress was to vote in secret to gut ethics regulations.  These are ethics regulations, by the way, put in place by Democrats in response to ethical scandals plaguing congressional Republicans.  So I note that there’s a lot of talk about ethics and revolving doors, but the revolving door that we see right now is the continual challenge on the part of congressional Republicans to skirt responsibility for their ethical violations.

With regard to the -- well, let me also say, I suspect this is not going to be the first time that we see congressional Republicans in this Congress seeking to help people in positions of power and influence escape accountability when it comes to the interests of the American people.  I’m confident we're going to see congressional Republicans do the work of their donors on Wall Street to try to gut Wall Street reform that would allow them to escape accountability for a bunch of financial transactions that we know are not in the public interest and actually do put taxpayers at risk and potentially put taxpayers on the hook for bailing out those big banks if those risky bets go bad.

One other thing we know congressional Republicans are likely to do is to go to their donors in the oil industry and say, hey, we can help you escape accountability for polluting the air and water and land that the American people treasure and in some cases depend on for our sustenance.

I think the real question for the President-elect is will he stand up to them then.

Q    Would you agree then with my, I guess, question that this is a rare instance where you agree with the President-elect’s criticism?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, first of all, I’ll let the President-elect’s team explain exactly what he was intending to communicate in this tweet.  It was not immediately obvious to me that he was indicating opposition to the gutting of ethical requirements.  Some people at least interpreted his tweet as indicating that the optics of doing it first were bad.  But again, I’ll leave it to the incoming team to explain it.

Because the position of this administration is that people who are entrusted with positions of authority in the United States government do have certain ethical obligations and they should be held independently accountable for adhering to those ethical requirements.  Certainly the executive branch does in a variety of ways.

And I do recall that when President Obama served in the United States Senate, he was one of a small number of members of the United States Senate who championed legislation to create and independent ethical oversight structure on the Senate side, too. Unfortunately, that effort did not succeed.  But the President’s views on the importance of these kinds of ethical oversight structures are well known.  And the President has long placed a priority on ensuring that they are strong.

Michelle.

Q    You didn't paint a very hopeful picture at one point there.  But the fact that this did die, that leadership took it out, do you see that as promising at all?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I started out reading a speech about hope, so I try to be an optimistic guy.  But what I also -- just to go back to that speech -- “We know that hope is not blind optimism.  It’s not ignoring the enormity of the tasks ahead or the roadblocks that stand in our path.”

So when you have a bunch of Republicans who campaigned for their office saying that they want to gut regulations that prevent Wall Street bankers from taking advantage of middle-class families, when you have a bunch of Republicans who run for Congress saying that they're going to make it easier for their largest contributors in the oil industry to pollute our water and our air, it’s hard to feel particularly optimistic about their willingness to look out for the American people.

But like I said, if the President-elect is willing to stand up to them in those instances that would be welcome news.  So we’ll just have to see exactly how that plays out.  I will say that it is -- even in the face of all that optimism, it is disheartening that the very first thing that Republicans in Congress chose to do was to vote in secret to gut ethical accountability.  That's not draining the swamp.  But that's day one.  We’ll see what the days in the future lead to.

Q    Okay.  So you talked about the President on the Hill tomorrow talking to Democrats to encourage them and how best to counter gutting Obamacare.  So what specifically does he want them to do?  I’m confused on what there is that can be done.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, you’ll have an opportunity, as Darlene referenced, to hear from the President at greater length about this later this week.  But I think you can certainly anticipate that the President will encourage Democrats to focus on those aspects of the Affordable Care Act that are strongly supported in bipartisan fashion all across the country.

The best example for this is the consumer protection that prevents insurance companies from discriminating against people that have preexisting conditions.  There’s nothing ideological or partisan about that notion.  It’s actually just a matter of basic fairness.  And what we have found is now that that law -- or that rule has been in effect for the last few years, we've actually seen Democrats and Republicans both come together and acknowledge that that's a good idea, that actually is fair.

And so the question, really, for Republicans is how do you construct a policy that protects that fairness?  Right now what Republicans are suggesting is that they would basically take away the requirement that everybody has health insurance, and that ultimately is going to interfere with the ability to ensure that insurance companies sign everybody up.  So that's ultimately something that Republicans are going to have to reconcile.

And I think this is something the President has talked about at some length, which is that there is a difference between campaigning and governing.  There’s a difference between going out there on a campaign trail and using all kinds of rhetoric saying you're going to repeal the Affordable Care Act because of the impact it’s having on our economy.  So you have to ignore a lot of facts in order to make that kind of rhetorical statement.  But once you are faced with actually implementing it, the questions get a lot harder.  And your ability to follow through on that promise that sounded really good on the campaign trail is called into question.

Q    So he wants Democrats to pressure their Republican colleagues?  When you say, focus on that, what does he expect them to be doing right now?

MR. EARNEST:  I think the President’s message to them is that they should be out there telling the stories of their constituents who are benefitting from this law.  I think that's certainly the most important thing they can do.

There are a number of Democrats on Capitol Hill who do have ideas of things that could be done that would strengthen the Affordable Care Act.  So some of them may choose to use this as an opportunity to offer up some additional suggestions and try to seek to Republican cooperation to strengthen the law.  The President certainly would encourage them to do that.

I think you can also expect to hear the President make the case that it’s not just about protecting the Affordable Care Act, it’s also about making sure that we're protecting Medicaid and Medicare.  And if we tear down the Affordable Care Act, we're having a terribly negative impact on Medicare and Medicaid, as well.  So I think there are a lot of strong, persuasive arguments to be made that would I think persuade many Americans that the idea of tearing down the Affordable Care Act is a bad idea.

Q    Okay.  And just quickly, does the administration believe that North Korea is that close to that ICBM capability?  And what does the President think of Donald Trump’s response to North Korea via his tweets?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I can -- the intelligence community has previously said that the United States has not seen North Korea test or demonstrate the ability to miniaturize a nuclear weapon and put it on an ICBM.  I’m not aware that that assessment has changed.  And some of the administration -- the intelligence community officials that I have spoken to today were not aware that that assessment has changed.  If it has changed, it’s something that will come from the intelligence community.

With regard to the President-elect’s tweets, I’ll let his team explain exactly what he means.

Thanks, Josh.

MR. EARNEST: Margaret.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  I appreciate it.  Happy New Year.

MR. EARNEST:  Happy New Year to you.

Q    Thanks.  So I’m just wondering whether you've spoken with President Obama about the possibility of slapping a tariff on cars made in Mexico and imported into the U.S. and what you think the impact of that would be on foreign policy or the economy.

MR. EARNEST:  I have not spoken to President Obama about that.  I know that that is contrary to the approach that President Obama has taken when it comes to trying to manage our trade relationships around the world.  In fact, the President was strongly supportive of a Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement that his administration negotiated that included Mexico that would have raised labor standards, raised environmental standards, would have protected intellectual property, and would have made it easier and fairer for U.S. businesses that are competing against Mexican businesses.  That would have been good for the U.S. economy.  That would have been good for U.S. workers.  It would have been good for U.S. businesses.

The incoming President does not seem to share that view and he believes in a different approach.  And many economists have expressed concerns about how the imposition of tariffs like some have suggested would actually have a starkly negative impact on the economy because it would not just result in higher prices being paid by American customers, it means that American goods that are shipped overseas face a similar retaliatory tariff.

And since we're not starting out on a level playing field, even if the tariff is equal in stature to the tariff that's imposed by the United States, it will have a disproportionate, negative impact on those American products.  And many economists have made the argument that imposing a tariff like that is actually the worst of both worlds when it comes to the interests of the United States, our consumers, our workers, and our economy.

So that's why the President has tried a much different approach.  But ultimately, the next administration will have to pursue the strategy that they believe is the best, and we’ll have an opportunity to evaluate what works best.

The President has a very strong track record when you consider the performance of the U.S. economy under his leadership, under the economic strategy that he has put together.  But the incoming President was elected on a promise to try things different -- to try different things, and to do things differently.  And we’ll have an opportunity to evaluate how well it works.

Q    I just wanted to go quickly -- do you know whether President Obama has spoken with the President of Mexico?  Today, perhaps?

MR. EARNEST:  No, I’m not aware that they’ve spoken today.

Q    And the kind of flipside to the President-elect’s Twitter-related actions on car policy, the Ford Motor Company has announced that they’ve canceled this major expansion into Mexico and are going to preserve some jobs in the U.S.  Would you say that that’s good news?  And would you applaud President-elect Trump for his actions on that?  Or do you know enough about it to comment on it?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’ve read some of the news coverage of this.  I’ve not been in touch with either the transition team or the auto -- Ford about their announcement, but I read in published reports about their announcement that it was not tied to any political considerations.  And I noted that over the last five years or so that Ford has actually increased the number of workers at their company by about 28,000.

So this is only the latest step in a long-running, significant and positive trend for the U.S. economy that those jobs are being protected.  So that’s obviously good news.

Jon.

Q    Josh --

Q    28,000 domestic?

MR. EARNEST:  We can look up the numbers for you.  We’ll follow up.

Q    Josh, on the measures taken against Russia, why was Vladimir Putin not mentioned as one of those sanctions?  Is that an indication you didn’t have evidence that the Russian leader was responsible for this, or directed this, approved it?

MR. EARNEST:  Not necessarily, Jon.  The intelligence community has indicated their view that given the significance of the actions that Russia carried out against the United States, their conclusion is that this is something that had to have been directed at the highest levels of the Russian government.

Q    So why not hit the President?  I mean, he’s the guy responsible.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, as you know, typically, with regard to sanctions policy, that there are only certain circumstances in which the leader of the country is personally named.  I can’t get into all the -- there’s no denying that this is a significant action.  So what I would say is just that it would be rather extraordinary if Mr. Putin himself were among the people who were listed.  But I can’t speak to the decisions that were made by the experts at the Treasury Department about who was named and who was not.

Q    So when the Chinese hacked OPM in 2015, 21-plus million current and former government employees and contractors had their personal records stolen by the Chinese.  Why did the White House do nothing publicly in reaction to that hack, which, in some ways, was even more widespread than what we saw here from the Russians, allegedly?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think that what we’ve seen is that these are two cyber incidents that are malicious in nature, but materially different.

Q    Twenty-one million people had their personal data taken.  Fingerprints, social security numbers, background checks -- I mean, this was a far-reaching hack.

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not downplaying the significance of it, I’m just saying that it’s different than seeking to interfere in the conduct of a U.S. national election.  I can’t speak to the steps that have been taken by the United States in response to that Chinese malicious cyber activity.

Q    But nothing was announced.  There was not a single step announced by the White House in response to that.

MR. EARNEST:  That is true that there was no public announcement about our response, but I can’t speak to what response may have been initiated in private.

Q    But no diplomats expelled, no compounds shut down, no sanctions imposed, correct?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I can’t speak to --

Q    You don’t do that stuff secretly.  I mean, that’s --

MR. EARNEST:  Well, certainly when it comes to the diplomats, that’s right, there were no diplomats PNGed.  That’s something that we would announce publicly.

But, look, I can’t speak to the response because, as you pointed out, that’s not something that we have announced.  It certainly is something that we take seriously.  It certainly -- the President has raised directly with his Chinese counterpart.  And we certainly have seen commitments from the Chinese with regard to some norms in cyberspace that we would like to see them observe -- for example, we did see the Chinese President commit in the Rose Garden in the fall of 2015 that Russia -- or that China would not be engaged in the kind of cyber-enabled theft for commercial gain that’s sponsored by national governments.

So that represents some progress, and that does represent the protection of U.S. commercial interests here in the United States.  And that certainly is an important step, an important part of establishing some of these rules of the road that will allow the international community to resolve how to limit the malicious behavior of some actors in cyberspace.

Q    But do you see how -- that there’s just this wildly different response?  With the Russians, which, of course, is very politically charged, the White House takes this action, makes it public.  With the Chinese, which was not so political charged but was absolutely as far-reaching a hack as we had ever seen in this country, nothing was done publicly.

MR. EARNEST:  At least of the government.  At least of the government, right?  There are ample examples of other malicious cyber actors in the private sector --

Q    But in response to that OPM hack --

MR. EARNEST:  -- exploiting personal identifiable information and engaging in other wide-reaching malicious cyber activity.

But, look, I’m not suggesting that somehow that’s not important.  What I’m just saying is that it’s materially different than the kind of hack-and-leak strategy that we saw the Russians engage in to try to influence our democracy.  That is significant.  That’s serious.  And that explains the serious steps that President Obama has imposed against the Russians in response.

But with regard to the Chinese, we have made some progress with them in trying to limit the kind of malicious cyber activity that could threaten U.S. interests either in the United States or around the world, in our government or in the private sector.  And we’re pleased with some of the progress that we’ve made.  But there is no denying that the next administration will assume a significant burden in trying to craft a policy in cyberspace that effectively stands up to our adversaries and looks out for the interests of the American people.

Q    Okay.  And then just one other quick -- Sean Spicer.  I think this is your first briefing since he was announced as the incoming press secretary for President Trump.

MR. EARNEST:  It is.

Q    Any advice to Sean on how to conduct this job?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I had an opportunity to congratulate Sean via email shortly after the announcement was made.  As you all have heard me say on a number of occasions, the opportunity and the honor to stand before this podium and advocate for a set of values and a President that I deeply believe in is extraordinary, and it’s the kind of opportunity that I wouldn’t trade for anything.  I sincerely hope that he finds the same kind of challenge and satisfaction in the job that I have.

And I don’t know Sean personally, but I expect to get the chance to meet him soon and to talk to him about this job a little bit.

Isaac.

Q    Iwant to bring it back to North Korea for a second.  Does the President feel confident in Donald Trump’s ability to protect the United States if a nuclear missile is launched by North Korea?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Isaac, that hearkens back to some of the rhetoric that was used by both sides in the campaign leading up to the election, and the President expressed some rather profound concerns about the incoming President.  But the election is over.  And I’ve done my best to avoid re-litigating those fights.

I think what I can tell you is that the President has strong confidence in the men and women of the United States military, the men and women of the United States intelligence community, the men and women in the United States State Department who ultimately are responsible for implementing policies that protect the American people, including from the threats that emanate in North Korea.

So we’re going to be counting on our men and women in the intelligence community to continue to provide decision-makers with the best available intelligence about North Korea’s actions.  We’re going to rely on the Department of Defense and the men and women of the United States military to make more strategic decisions about stationing equipment and antiballistic missile technology to protect the American people.  And we’re going to be relying on the men and women of the State Department to go and build an international coalition to increase the pressure on the North Korean regime to compel them to pursue a different path.

And those are all institutions and patriots who, every day, set aside politics, set aside their own political leanings, set aside their own preferences about who should be President of the United States, and just focus on the task at hand.  And the people in those three communities -- at the State Department, the Defense Department and intelligence community -- all have substantial responsibilities when it comes to protecting the American people.  And the President has confidence that those men and women, those American patriots, will continue to do their important work with enormous skill and expertise and patriotism to protect the country.

Q    But going back to -- as you said, there was a lot of talk about this during the campaign.  It’s been about two months since he delivered his last campaign speech.  In those two months, does he feel more confident in Donald Trump’s ability to handle the nuclear situation, both in having the nuclear codes and protecting from a nuclear attack?  Less confident?  Or is he in the same place that he was the day of the election?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t spoken to the President about this, but my assessment would be that his opinions have not changed.  But the time and place for presenting those opinions has come and gone, and we’re focused now on a transition.

Q    And just on the WikiLeaks -- Julian Assange did an interview in which he -- with Fox News in which he says that the administration -- first of all, he says that WikiLeaks did not receive its information from a state actor, and, second of all, says that there are essentially holes in the case that the administration has laid out about the role that WikiLeaks had, that WikiLeaks wasn’t mentioned in anything that the President or anybody has said about this, and that this means that you guys must not be sure that there is a connection there.  What’s your response to that?

MR. EARNEST:  My response is that the President has complete confidence in the assessment that’s been put forward by the intelligence community, and there’s no reason to doubt it.

Q    And that WikiLeaks received -- that there’s no lack of mentioning WikiLeaks for any purpose, or -- what Assange is talking about is that you guys didn’t say -- you’ve connected it to the Russians, but you haven’t said, well, then it went to WikiLeaks from the Russians, that that’s just semantics, essentially, from Assange?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I didn’t see the entirety of his -- I didn’t see much of any of his interview, so it’s hard for me to respond directly in kind.  I think what I can tell you is the President has complete confidence in the assessment that’s been put forward by the intelligence community.  And there’s still work that they’re doing on this.  And the President has tasked the intelligence community with putting forward more information before January 20th not just about what Russia did in the 2016 election, but about some of the malicious cyber activity that we saw in the context of the 2008 and 2012 elections, as well.  And there certainly is the possibility that more evidence that’s pertinent to some of those claims could be included.  We’ll have to wait and see.

Q    Just last question -- do you have any update on when we should expect the intelligence report that the President has asked for?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have an update on timing at this point, just before January 20th.

Julianna.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  David Axelrod tweeted -- going back to the House Ethics Office -- David Axelrod tweeted “This House Ethics drama was an absolute gift to Donald Trump, a big fat zeppelin for him to shoot down, which he did.”  Do you think that this was teed up for the President-elect, who himself has had some issues regarding conflicts of interests and some of his own ethical questions swirling around him leading into his inauguration?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I haven’t spoken to David today.  My guess is he wasn’t expressing admiration for a clever strategic move on the part of Republicans to make the President look -- the President-elect look good.  I actually think he was making the opposite point, that Republicans in Congress have revealed a lot about their priorities when the first action that they took was to vote in secret to gut some of the ethical requirements that they’re subject to.  So I think the point that David was making is simply that it’s pretty obvious to everybody that that’s a really bad idea.

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  I just want to circle back on Jon’s question about Russia versus China, and the reaction.  Lisa Monaco has previously cited diplomatic inroads with China as part of the reason why the administration has had some success in limiting and reducing cyber activity -- negative cyber activity from the Chinese.  And I’m curious why, then, would the administration continue that same process with the Russians to get a similar response, rather than the sort of heavy-handed expelling operatives and shuttering --

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, I think the response to the Chinese action has been different than the response to the Russian action because their actions that both those countries undertook were different.  What we saw on the part of the Chinese was concerning with regard to some of the malicious cyber activity that had an impact on the U.S. government.  The Russian cyber activity was actually a more specifically directed threat to undermine U.S. democracy.

So their tactics were different.  Their ultimate goal was different.  And that would explain why our response was different.  In both cases, we’ve taken that malicious cyber activity and those breaches quite seriously, but our responses have, as I acknowledge to Jon, have been different.

Q    Also, on the Ford Motor announcement -- and you may or may not have had a chance to see it, the one where they’re saying essentially they’re going to not develop this plant over in Mexico.  Donald Trump had previously threatened to levy some sort of a tax or, if you will, some sort of tariff on cars that were made there that would come back to the U.S.  You were asked earlier if you thought this was a victory for I think maybe Donald Trump, but I’d be curious if you think this is a victory for the American people and American workers in particular, who may now benefit from the fact that there will be more jobs related to this decision than might have been.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, it won’t surprise you to hear that the President who has presided over an economy that’s created nearly 900,000 manufacturing jobs is pleased to hear when another 700 manufacturing jobs have been saved.

Q    I also want to ask you something the President sort of hinted at -- or maybe not hinted at, maybe he just came right out and said it.  (Laughter.)  He said, “Listen, if I were able to run again, I would have beaten Donald Trump.”  Why do you think the President made that point?  What was behind his decision to make a comment like that?

MR. EARNEST:  Because his point was -- if you go back and look at the interview, he was making the point that the message that he delivered in his 2008 campaign and in his 2012 campaign is one that deeply resonated with the American people and got him -- allowed him to build a strong coalition all across the country, that allowed him to be elected in 2008 and reelected in 2012 with strong majorities not just of the electoral college, but actually a majority of the voting population.

And President Obama is the first President to be elected and reelected with more than 51 percent of the vote since Eisenhower.  And that’s an indication of how much strong support there is all across the country for the President’s message.  And the President believes, after eight years, that he’s stayed true to that message, that he’s campaigning on the same set of values and on the same set of -- message that appeals to the idea that everybody in America should have an opportunity to succeed and that people shouldn’t be --

Q    -- that message in North Carolina; he was out very forcefully.  They saw that message in Michigan; he was out very forcefully.  And neither state went for the Democrat in that particular circumstance.

MR. EARNEST:  That’s true.  But I think what we’ve found -- and this was true in 2010 and to a lesser extent in 2014, but still in 2014 -- that when the President wasn’t on the ballot that he didn’t have as much success as he would have liked in making that same argument in support of other candidates.  And I think there are a lot of theories as to why that is, but that’s undeniably true.

Q    Would the President like to debate Donald Trump?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  No, he would not.

April.

Q    Josh, the President is going to be -- when it comes to ACA and the contributions it’s given to millions of people -- and you’ve already cited some of the positive points.  But because this is so important for the President in the waning days to lean in like this, can you get into the conversations that President Obama has had with Donald Trump in the lead-up to tomorrow?  Can you talk to us about what he said about ACA on the phone?

MR. EARNEST:  I can’t.  I’ve worked hard to try to protect the ability of the President of the United States to have private conversations with the President-elect.  And when some of the fact of those calls has spilled into the public, we’ve done our best to try to confirm and explain to you the context of those conversations.  But for the substance of the calls, I’m going to protect their ability to have those calls in private.

Q    The President here, the last day before he went on vacation, did say when he talks to Donald Trump, he explains the benefits of some issues.  Was he talking about ACA as one of those conversations and the benefits that he was talking about?

MR. EARNEST:  I wouldn’t be surprised if the Affordable Care Act was among those.

Q    So when he says “benefits,” does he tout the things that we already know?  Or does he go into the weeds about things and talk about more that we -- things that the average person doesn’t know and how it works?  What makes it work?  What would be a problem if it’s taken away?  What does he say when he talks about the benefits to Donald Trump about that?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I’m just not going to get into the context of their -- to the substance of the conversations that they’re having.

Q    The President did allude to that, so he didn’t -- he didn’t allude to it, he did tell us that from this podium.

MR. EARNEST:  Okay.

Q    Okay.  So lastly, with everything going on now, the back-and-forth between the President-elect and the sitting President of the United States in the waning days of this President’s presidency, is there a possibility, a strong possibility that there will be a final press conference from President Obama before he leaves office?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have any scheduling announcements at this point, but I wouldn’t be surprised if something like that happened.  We’ll keep you posted.

Q    Is it to protect -- would it be to protect his legacy more so, or to put a final note to America?

MR. EARNEST:  We’ll wait until we have something to announce before we describe why we announced it.  (Laughter.)

Jordan.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  While the President was in Hawaii, it was reported that the Obama administration is -- well, it informed Congress that it could transfer up to 19 prisoners from Guantanamo Bay before the President leaves office.  Are you able to confirm those reports?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not in a position to confirm individual notifications to Congress.  As you know, Jordan, the statute does require that when the administration is prepared to transfer a detainee from the prison at Guantanamo Bay to another country in the context of security requirements that would limit their ability to pose a threat to the United States, the administration is required to give Congress 30 days’ notice before completing that transfer.

So this is part of our routine effort that we’ve undertaken over the last several years to reduce the population of the prison at Guantanamo Bay.  But I can’t speak to any individual notifications that have been made to Congress or give you a specific preview about potential upcoming transfers.  But I think I would expect at this point additional transfers to be announced before January 20th.

Q    On that note, Donald Trump tweeted today that there should be no further releases from Guantanamo.  Is his attitude on that issue going to factor into the administration’s decisions at all on transfers in the final day?

MR. EARNEST:  No, it will not.  He’ll have an opportunity to implement the policy that he believes is most effective when he takes office on January 20th.

Ron.

Q    On the Russia hacking, you’ve heard some of the statements from the President-elect that are skeptical of the intelligence assessments.  Has there been any conversation between members of this administration and the incoming administration about the skepticism, about the intelligence about Russia being behind this hack?

MR. EARNEST:  I can’t speak to any specific conversations, but I’m confident in the context of the transition and getting the President-elect’s team up to speed on a range of important national security issues that we’re currently dealing with here.  I’m confident that officials in the administration, including at the White House, have represented to the transition team full confidence in the assessment in conclusions that have been announced by the intelligence community.

Q    So what do you think of the President-elect’s statements that he knows things that others don't know and that he still is not convinced that the Russians are behind this?

MR. EARNEST:  I'm glad that it's somebody else’s job to explain exactly what he meant.  (Laughter.)

Q    Because you --

MR. EARNEST:  Because I don't know.  So presumably, somebody who has an opportunity to speak to him directly can try to explain to those of us in the public who weren’t quite sure what he’s referring to.

Q    But this is a serious thing, though, because this was a matter of national security that --

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, I --

Q    -- the sanctions were levied and these diplomats were expelled.  This was a big, big deal.  How concerned is the President or the administration about the President-elect’s attitude that he knows more or something different and that he’s still not convinced?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, in the context of the campaign we had ample opportunity to --

Q    This is the real thing -- this is not the campaign.

MR. EARNEST:  The campaign is over, that's right.  The campaign is over.  And now we are in a position where our responsibility is, as public servants in the Obama administration, to do as much as we possibly can to help the President-elect’s team get up to speed and understand the complexity and depth of the range of issues, both domestic and national security, that they’re going to be tasked with managing, starting just 16 days from now.

Q    Bottom line, you can't explain why there’s this difference of opinion here in terms of --

MR. EARNEST:  The bottom line, there’s a reason that the President-elect has his own spokesperson, and there will be somebody else standing behind this podium when he takes office.

Q    When you were talking about the review that's underway on cyber issues, I think you said that in terms of proof or evidence that there may or may not be a public release of what we would consider proof or evidence of the claims.  Is that true?

MR. EARNEST:  There are a couple of things on this.  Isaac was asking me about some of the claims that were apparently made in an interview about how or whether or to what extent WikiLeaks may have been involved in this effort.  And I was trying to answer his question by saying that it's possible, though I don't know, but it's possible that additional information that would be helpful in understanding what WikiLeaks’s role in all of this could be included in that report.  I don't know whether it will be or not.

Q    But as to the role that the Russians played in the -- the intelligence agencies in Russia and so forth.

MR. EARNEST:  That's a definitive conclusion that's been reached -- that was announced, actually, before the election.  Some of the information that was included in the Joint Analysis Report that was released by the FBI and DHS last week included technical information about the tactics and technology and software that was used by the Russians to carry out these actions and other actions like them.  I think that's -- its technical, but I think it's pretty solid evidence of Russian involvement in this matter.

Q    So you don't -- the administration doesn’t feel a need to present more proof?

MR. EARNEST:  No.  The administration feels a responsibility to communicate as directly and as clearly as possible with the American public to help them understand what the U.S. government knows about Russian efforts to undermine our system of government.  And we've already done that.  We did that before the election, and I would anticipate that that report that the intelligence community is working on would also further that goal.

Q    And on meetings on Hill about the Affordable Care Act, is that the only issue on the agenda?  Or is there anything else that the President wants to communicate to these incoming members of Congress about his concerns, his priorities, his hopes and fears?

MR. EARNEST:  Protecting the Affordable Care Act is the primary topic on the agenda.  I wouldn't rule out that other things may come up.  And if they do, we'll do our best to give you a readout.

Q    What else is there?  I guess I'm just trying to get a sense of -- 17 and a half days or whatever is left -- what else is there that the President is really trying to --

MR. EARNEST:  Well, we obviously touched on a couple of them.  We talked about the Affordable Care Act, and there isn't just the need to try to protect the Affordable Care Act from being destroyed by Republicans; there’s also a need to make sure that we're doing everything we can to make it possible for people to sign up for the Affordable Care Act.  And we've actually seen people signing people up at a record clip.  Despite all this negative publicity and despite some of the uncertainty that Republicans are injecting into this process, we're actually seeing a record number of people signing up for the Affordable Care Act that are at a record rate.  So that's a positive step.  And we certainly -- that didn’t happen by accident.  And we certainly want to make sure we're doing what’s necessary to facilitate those signups.

Obviously following through on the business with Russia in terms of implementing the steps that were announced last week ad also putting forward this report before January 20th are steps that we're focused on.

You can certainly always expect the President to be very focused on the counter-ISIL campaign.  And the President will continue to meet with his national security team.  I wouldn’t be surprised if that's something that members of Congress may be interested in.

And of course, we're focused on a smooth and effective transition.  And that means trying to pay attention to all the little details that may not rise to the level of an interaction like this, but are still critical to a seamless handoff of governing responsibility from one administration to the next.  And that requires the time and attention of a lot of people inside the administration, including the President of the United States.

Q    How is all that going?

MR. EARNEST:  So far it’s going well.

Q    We’ve heard mixed messages about it.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’ve heard mixed messages about this from the other side.  But this administration has remained focused on the effective -- facilitating the effective transition that President Obama promised at the beginning of last year.  And we've made good on that promise so far.

Mark.

Q    Josh, now that the new Congress has been convened, does President Obama have any intention of making any nominations or resubmitting any old nominations to the new Congress?

MR. EARNEST:  Nothing that I have to preview here.  But if we have -- if we're going to re-nominate some people, we’ll make sure and let you know publicly that we've done such.

Q    Should we assume the Garland nomination has now lapsed?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the President acknowledged at a Hanukkah event that Chief Judge Garland attended last year that President Obama expects Chief Judge Garland to continue to serve the American people with distinction on the United States Circuit Court of Appeals.

The fact that he was not given the opportunity to explain to the Senate and to the American people why he would have served the country honorably and with distinction on the United States Supreme Court is a scar on the reputation of the United States Senate.

It is a part of the legacy of Republican leadership in Congress from the last several years.  And I don't mean that as a compliment.  And I think that for years the United States Senate will be dealing with the fallout of the decision that they made to so egregiously subject Chief Judge Garland to such unfair treatment.

Republicans themselves have praised Chief Judge Garland.  Republicans have described him a consensus nominee.  Republicans have praised his service to this country -- both as a judge but also as a federal prosecutor, and a senior official at the Department of Justice who led the investigation and prosecution of one of the worst terrorists in American history.

Merrick Garland is a patriot.  And he deserved far better treatment than he received from Republicans in the United States Senate.  But because he’s the bigger man, he’s going to continue to serve this country with honor and distinction at the United States Circuit Court of Appeals.  And the President is quite proud that he’ll do that.

Q    What do you mean by fallout?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I mean that there will be difficulty in the Senate not just in the Trump presidency, but for future Presidents as they navigate the process of nominating judges to the federal bench.

What sort of credibility do Republicans have in making the case to Democrats that they should fairly consider the nominations of a Republican judge -- of a Republican President?  Republican senators blocked an eminently qualified Supreme Court nominee whose qualifications were not in question simply because he was nominated by a Democratic President.  How then can Republicans go to Democratic senators and say that they should support nominees put forward by a Republican President?  They have no standing in which to do that.

Now, will Democrats do the right thing and fulfill their constitutional obligations?  I think they probably will.  But they won’t be doing it because Republicans have any semblance of moral high ground or any sort of moral leverage or any moral weight to their claim that that's what Democratic senators should do.

And I think that that breakdown of comity in the United States Senate, that abdication of the basic responsibility of members of the United States by subjecting it to such intense partisanship and actually allowing partisanship to supersede constitutional obligation, it’s discouraging.  And it’s a precedent that I think Republicans will regret setting.

Q    Also, can you tell us what President Obama’s thinking is in going to Chicago next week for the farewell address?  I went back and checked.  All the farewell addresses back to Eisenhower were delivered here at the White House.  Why does President Obama want to go out of town?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, President Obama is going to go back to his hometown, go back to the place where he began his career in public service -- a community, a city that was so supportive of him throughout his career in public service.

And there is a unique story to President Obama’s public service having started out as a community organizer and somebody whose first job in public service wasn’t in politics, per Senate -- at least it didn't involve running for office -- but was actually focused on trying to help people in the economically disadvantaged communities advocate for themselves.

And that commitment to fighting for working people is something that has motivated President Obama from his earliest days as a community organizer to his last days as President of the United States.  And so it’s a fitting bookend that he would go back to that city where he got his start to make a speech like this.

Q    Will that be his last out-of-town trip?

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, I would anticipate that it will be his last out-of-town trip as President of the United States.

Q    Thank you.

MR. EARNEST:  Alexis.

Q    Josh, to follow up on the list that you were giving to Ron, is the President going to -- how would he describe to Democrats that he speaks to this week and also to the beneficiaries of DACA what to expect, what they should plan on, what they should anticipate after the 20th?  Because some Democrats have urged the President to act in a unique kind of way before he leaves to extend the benefits or to maintain the benefits of DACA?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’m not aware of any specific announcements that you should expect from the President on this particular issue.  Of course, there is a longstanding precedent in the U.S. government for the way that information like this is maintained.

There’s a commitment that was made to people who came forward to apply for deferred action -- DREAMers.  These are individuals who came to the United States as children, were brought to the United States as children and are here through no fault of their own.  And the United States is the only country they've ever known.  And many of these are young people who have graduated from high school, gone on to college, served on our military, have otherwise shown themselves to be quality additions to the country and to communities across the country.

And so the President’s view is that these individuals are American in every way but their papers, and that the limited enforcement resources of the United States’ government are better focused on people who are in the United States illegally and have criminal records, or only recently crossed the border.  Those are the kinds of people that are worthy of aggressive enforcement action.

And that is exactly the kind of policy that this administration has pursued.  It’s made our country safer.  It’s made our country fairer.  And I know at least at one point, the President-elect indicated that he thought that was a pretty smart approach.

But when it comes to what he will do after January 20th, even the current President of the United States is not sure exactly what the incoming President may decide to do.

Q    The other thing I wanted to ask you is a small detail for January 20th.  So is there any change to the normal protocol or customary protocol where we expect the President-elect, the Vice President-elect to come for coffee at the White House and to ride together with the outgoing President to the swearing-in?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t seen the schedule for January 20th.  But obviously as that date gets closer, we’ll be able to walk you through all the minute details of that day that symbolize the kind of peaceful transition, the peaceful transfer of power that is a hallmark of American democracy and it critical to the strength and success of our country.

Q    But you can't confirm today that President Obama and Mrs. Obama extend an invitation to the Trumps to come for coffee before they go up to the swearing-in?

MR. EARNEST:  At this point, I would expect that as we have over the last couple of months, we will observe the kinds of traditions and steps that have ensured a smooth and effective transition.  That's what we've been doing for the last two months.  I would expect that continue on the last day.

But when it comes to the actual details of the schedule, we’ll have more to say about that as the day gets closer.

Francesca.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  On Ford, you had said that it didn't seem like there were any political considerations for the decision that was made today, or at least that you hadn’t seen anything --

MR. EARNEST:  I think what I said is that Ford had indicated that their decision was not affected by politics.

Q    Okay, sure.  But the CEO of Ford did say that he was encouraged by the pro-growth policies of President-elect Trump and the new Congress.  And that certainly sounds like it’s a political consideration or at least a calculation that it would be better to build more cars in the United States under the incoming President than under the current President.

MR. EARNEST:  My guess is you should ask that question to the Ford CEO.  But I don't think that he would want his comments to be interpreted that way.  But you should ask somebody who has spoken to him.

Q    A couple more on a different subject.

MR. EARNEST:  Sure.

Q    You seemed a little bit feistier today in response to some of the things that the President-elect has said, or else you're just happy to see us --

MR. EARNEST:  Maybe it’s because I shaved that holiday beard this morning, so I’m feeling a little --

Q    That's possibly could be it.  (Laughter.)  And again, perhaps it’s just you're happy to be back here.  But it does seem like during the two-week break between when we were last here and now, that the détente between the old administration and the new administration has somehow been broken.  You had President-elect Trump talking about roadblocks that this administration was putting out, and you directly challenging him today when it comes to ethics, when it comes to Ford with trade, that sort of thing.  Is there a reason for that?  Is it that the clock is ticking down on the administration?  Do you not see it that way?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't see it that way.  I think that -- what I have done since the day after the election when I stood at this podium for almost two hours answering your questions is I’ve made clear that the vigorous, deeply held, passionate differences of opinion that we have on a range of issues from policy to basic American values, there are differences.  And they're profound.  But there’s also a profound responsibility that all of us who serve in this administration, including the President, has to ensure a smooth and effective transition.

That doesn't mean that we're prepared to go along with everything that the incoming administration says, but it certainly does mean that we have a responsibility to give the incoming President every opportunity to get a running start on the job.

And that's something that President Obama has taken to heart in his Oval Office meeting and the handful of conversations that they've had on the telephone since then.  And there have been a number of meetings all across the federal government that demonstrate our ongoing commitment to ensuring a smooth and effective transition.

     It doesn't mean those differences went away.  And the fact that those differences exist don't mean that the transition has hit a rough spot.  It means that these are deeply held views of the Obama administration, and they differ sharply with the President-elect.

But the President-elect campaigned on doing things differently.  He campaigned on taking a different approach, and he won an election against a candidate who was pursuing a strategy that was more similar to what President Obama has pursued.  Now, the President-elect didn't get more votes, but he did win the election.  And since day one, this administration has been focused on ensuring a smooth and effective transition.  And we've made good on that promise.

And the fact that we have differences of opinion is not evidence that the transition is breaking down.  It’s evidence that we've got well-known differences, but we're not letting them get in the way of a smooth and effective transition.

Q    And on that note, could you tell us a little bit more about the tone that the President will take in that speech next week, what some of the themes maybe he’d hit upon would be, and whether or not his family will go with him on that trip?

MR. EARNEST:  We’ll have more on the speech before the end of this week.  I know that the speech is still going through some drafts.  Rather than preview it now, let me get it a little bit farther down the process of being written.  But I’ll come back to you with something before the end of the week.

Q    How many drafts?

MR. EARNEST:  We’ll keep you posted.

George.

Q    I’ve got to ask you a quick follow on your nostalgic journey back to Decorah.

MR. EARNEST:  Yes.

Q    What happened to those two young organizers?  Did they end up in the Cabinet?  Ambassadors?  How did you reward them? (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  I know one of them worked at the White House.  And I’m not sure what happened to the other one.

Q    You didn't reward the other one.  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  Both of them have gone on to do quite well, I’m sure.  But there are at least a couple of other people that I first met in that Iowa, Des Moines -- at Des Moines, Iowa campaign headquarters that are still working at the White House today.  So I’m not the only one who is still around.

Chris, I’ll give you the last one.

Q    Great.  Over the weekend, Judge Reed O’Connor issued a nationwide injunction against the Obama administration interpretation of the Affordable Care Act to prohibit discrimination against transgender people and women who have had abortions.  Does it make sense for the administration to fight that decision in the 17 days that remain before Trump takes office?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’d refer you to the Department of Justice for the legal strategy that we’ll pursue.  But obviously the administration believes deeply that all Americans regardless of their sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation should have access to quality affordable health care free from any sort of discrimination.  That's not just a principle and a value that the administration believes strongly in.  I’m confident that the vast majority of Americans believe strongly in that principle, as well.

Thanks, everybody.  We’ll see you tomorrow.

END
1:16 P.M. EST

MR. SCHULTZ:  Good afternoon.  I apologize profusely for being so late.  But I will try to move through this swiftly, so you all can get started on your weekends.

Darlene, I don't have anything at the top.  You're welcome to lead us off.

Q    Thank you.  Can you speak to what prompted the President to order this review on the Russian hacking into the presidential elections?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Sure, Darlene.  And we should just clarify that the President, earlier this week, instructed the intelligence community to conduct a full review of the pattern of malicious cyber activity related to our presidential election cycle.  So he’s requested this report be completed and submitted to him before the end of his term.

As you all know, in 2008, there were intrusions into both the Obama and McCain campaigns.  There haven't been any noted episodes in 2012, but the President asked to go back, with what we know now, to make sure that we're using every tool possible as a means of due diligence.  And then, of course, in 2016, our intelligence community determined that there was malicious cyber activity intended to interfere with our elections.  In the high confidence assessment that was released this past October, the intelligence community made very clear that this was activity directed by the highest levels of the Russian government.

So as we've made clear, we are committed to ensuring the integrity of our elections.  And this report will dig into this pattern of malicious cyber activity timed to our elections, take stock of our defensive capabilities, and capture lessons learned to make sure that we brief members of Congress and stakeholders, as appropriate.

Q    Will the review go all the way back to ’08?

MR. SCHULTZ:  So we're going to actually -- what the President asked for is a review to look at malicious activity timed to our presidential election cycle.  And so it will be broader than just looking at this past election.

Q    Will it also look at whether state election systems were tampered with, or will it just be about email intrusions?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, what we determined in mid-November, a few weeks ago now, is that state election systems did not -- the federal government did not detect any increased malicious cyber activity on Election Day or related to the administering of the elections.  So we've already made that determination, and that's something we've announced publicly from here.  But in terms of what this review will look at, this is going to be a review that’s conducted by the intelligence community.

As you know, in that October statement that we released, that was released by the *Department[Office of the Director] of National Intelligence and Department of Homeland Security.  Obviously there’s other agencies that work on those issues, including the FBI, the Department of Justice and Department of State.

Q    Will it be made public?

MR. SCHULTZ:  So we're going to make public as much as we can.  Obviously, you can imagine a report like this is going to contain highly sensitive and even classified information, perhaps, so when that report is submitted we're going to take a look.  We want to make sure we brief Congress and relevant stakeholders, like possibly state administrators who actually operationalize the elections.

So given that the directive to launch this review was just this week, we want to make sure that that process unfolds in all due accord.

Q    And quickly on one other subject.  Can you go into what guidance the White House may be giving to departments and agencies in the event there’s a shutdown tonight?

MR. SCHULTZ:  I can, Darlene.  And we should just take a step back and remember that the fact that we're even talking about this is an indication of the failure of Republicans to govern.  They come to Washington -- they hold majorities in both houses of Congress, and they come to Washington with a basic responsibility, and at that top of that list is funding the government.  And the fact that we're in the 11th hour here and you even have to ask that question is an indication that Republicans have failed to fulfil their basic responsibility of governing.

So given that today is the deadline to keep the government open, we're obviously expecting and hope for them to pass a continuing resolution.  We understand that there’s conversations ongoing on the Hill about the path forward here.  There’s been concerns raised by Democrats about a couple of provisions; we echo those concerns.  Josh talked about them earlier this week.

That includes not fully supporting retired coal miners who deserve benefits related to their health care and their pensions. These are coal miners who worked for decades in treacherous conditions and who earned these benefits.  Unfortunately, the proposal that Republicans are floating only takes care of them for a few months.  We believe that's not right.  So, thankfully, Senator Manchin and Senator Brown are leading the effort here.  I know those talks continue.

Another concern that we've raised -- that's been raised by Democrats on the Hill includes playing games with funding for Flint.  We've heard forever now from Republicans who’ve demagogued that the federal government should be doing more to support the people of Flint, and we couldn't agree more.  Republicans this fall committed to doing more to support the people of Flint.  And unfortunately, the funding in the CR is tied to a bill that's completely unrelated and that has problems in it.  So it's unclear whether that bill can even pass.  So Republicans need to stop monkeying around with this and just get the job done.

In terms of the guidance that the Office of Management and Budget has released, I can tell you that, unfortunately, under a Republican-controlled Congress, they have too much practice releasing guidance about government shutdowns.  And they've been in touch with agencies across the administration, across the government, planning for a number of contingencies.

Ayesha.

Q    Hi.  So South Korean lawmakers voted overwhelmingly today to impeach President Park.  I was wondering, does the White House have any response to that or any response to these latest developments?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Ayesha, we are following developments in the Republic of Korea closely.  It's worth noting that this has been a time of political unease and change.  And despite that, South Koreans have acted peacefully, calmly, and in respect for their own democratic principles.

The United States continues to be a steadfast ally, friend and partner to the Republic of Korea.  And we look forward to working closely with *President[Prime Minister] Hwang in his new capacity as Acting President.  We've always said that our alliances are deeper than tied to any particular -- any singular leader in any country, but rather, our ties are based on long-shared values, goals and interests.

We got similar questions earlier this year when Prime Minister Cameron stepped down, that if that would alter the relationship between the United States and the United Kingdom.  And the answer is, no, that we have a strong relationship with the people of -- with the Republic of Korea, and I wouldn’t expect that to change.

Q    And does the White House have a position on whether she should step down or go through the impeachment process?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Ayesha, we have enough on our plate in domestic politics, so it's not going to be for us to weigh in on the domestic politics in Korea.

Q    On another subject.  There's been reports that President-elect Donald Trump will remain on as an executive producer for "Celebrity Apprentice."  And this morning, his advisor, Kellyanne Conway, compared the possibility of him staying on as executive producer of "Celebrity Apprentice" to President Obama's golfing.  I was wondering, does the White House think those two are comparable?  Do they think they're similar?  And does the President have any thoughts on President-elect Trump remaining on as executive producer of this show?

MR. SCHULTZ:  So I will confess to you I have not asked the President about this today.  I'm not quite sure that analogy holds any water.  But, look, that's going to be a question for the President-elect's team and perhaps our friends at NBC to answer how that relationship will work.

Michelle.

Q    So you mentioned that this new review of Russian hacking activity will go back to 2008.  Is that the main way that it differs from the FBI investigation that's already done?

MR. SCHULTZ:  I see.  It's a good question.  And the FBI investigation was looking at specific acts that we saw over the summer and fall of this year.  So, as you know, they looked at the hacks at campaign committees like the DNC and other malicious cyber activity that we were detecting.  At the time, they determined that this is activity that could have only been directed from the highest levels of the Russian government.  So, yes, this is going to put that activity in a greater context.  That's going to look at the pattern of this happening from foreign actors, dating all the way back to 2008.

Q    Okay.  And the response that's coming now from the foreign ministry in Russia is that they're saying many times they've asked Americans to provide full information but never had any response.  Is that true?  I mean, have you guys not wanted to have those conversations with Lavrov or others?  Is it something you wanted to kind of keep to yourselves for now?  What can you say about the handling of this with respect to Russia?

MR. SCHULTZ:  I think to the contrary, Michelle.  This isn’t something we've tried to keep to ourselves.  The President, himself, has made clear that this is activity that's unacceptable, that is outside the bounds of --

Q    But in terms of, like, the greater detail that they said they were looking for.

MR. SCHULTZ:  I'm not aware of any sort of specific request that they've asked for.  But the President has made clear his views on this, and that malicious cyber activity -- specifically malicious cyber activity timed to our elections has no place in the international community.

Unfortunately, this activity is not new to Moscow.  We've seen them do this for years, try and meddle in elections and engage in similar activities in Europe and across Asia.  So they, unfortunately, have a long record of this.  But the President has made clear to President Putin that this is unacceptable.  But that's not the only channel of communication.  I do know that Secretary Kerry has talked to his counterpart, and we have other national security officials who have made this clear to their counterparts in Moscow.

Q    Okay.  And will this include a look at any potential attempts or activity at local levels?  Or this is only going to look at kind of a bigger or federal level?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, I think these agencies will have to take a look at what we saw in 2008, 2012, and 2016.  So I think that this is going to be a deep dive, that this will be a review that is broad and deep at the same time.  And so they're going to look at where the activity leads them to look at.  In other words, again, like I mentioned, in 2012 there was no noted episode of this nature, but knowing what we know now, using the tools that we have now, we can go back and see if there was anything that was missed back then.

Q    How is there going -- I mean, if this is going to be so broad and deep, as you said, going beyond what the FBI took a pretty long time to do, and going back to 2008, how is there time to do this?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, it's a huge priority.  This is a major priority for the President of the United States.  He directed his intelligence community and national security officials to take this on.  He expects that report to be issued to him before he leaves office.  You're right, there's going to be a lot of work to be done.  But like you've also said, there's already been a lot of work done about the episode this year in 2016.  So what we want to do is put that into context over the past eight years to see if we can sort of develop patterns, take stock of where we are and make sure that we do have the right defensive capabilities in place.

Q    So when you see the allegations from some members of Congress and others that there could be evidence that Russia was actually trying to influence the election in a particular way, will this also look at potential motivations and whether that meaning was there or not?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, we know that, again, in October when the intelligence community released their high confidence assessment --

Q    Just real quick -- was it high confidence?  Because I thought the statement was just confidence.  And this is the first time I've heard high confidence.

MR. SCHULTZ:  Hans, I should double-check that, but I'm pretty sure it was high confidence.

Q    I can read it to you.

MR. SCHULTZ:  Let us take this, because when I was briefed out here I was told it was high confidence.  But maybe we should just sync up.

Q    So in the breadth of it, will it also look at whether they tried to influence the election in a particular way?  Is it safe to say that it would look at motivations?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, I want to be clear here that this is not an effort to challenge the outcome of the election, that we have acknowledged who won the election.  It wasn't the candidate that the President campaigned for.  And so the President has actually gone out of his way to make sure that we are providing for a seamless transition of power.  So we're not calling into question the election results.  We are taking seriously our responsibility to protect the integrity of those elections.

Q    But is it safe to say that it will look at motivations and goals as well as the technical side of what was done?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, I think in that assessment that was released in October, it made clear that this was an attempt to interfere in our elections.  So whether or not they dig deeper into motives, I'm not sure that will be a part of this review, but there are some things we already know for sure.

Justin.

Q    I want to go back to Korea first.  I'm wondering if you anticipate this having any impact on the implementation of the missile defense system that we've been trying to install there, and also, if you have any sort of reaction to the, I think, push for corporate reform in South Korea that seems to have been a kind of underpinning of, or at least partial underpinning of this impeachment effort.

MR. SCHULTZ:  Sure, I don't have -- I haven't heard any internal conversations that this could change that agreement that was announced earlier this year between President Park's administration and ours.  So I don't have anything to suggest that that agreement is going to be changing.

Obviously, in the wake of the political changes in the Republic of Korea, we are in close coordination -- in close contact with our counterparts there.  So the President's belief is that our relationship with the people of Korea is solid and strong.  And that's based on a number of things.  One, it's our rich people-to-people ties.  There's a large Korean population in America that is strong and vibrant.  There are strong relationships with young people between the United States and the Republic of Korea, a lot of cultural exchange programs that we take seriously.

Obviously, Korea is a large trading partner, so we have vibrant economic ties.  And lastly, obviously regional security, as you're suggesting.  We work closely with Korea on our stabilization and security efforts in the Korean Peninsula, specifically in regards to the threat posed by North Korea.

And the second question?

Q    I think we got it all.

MR. SCHULTZ:  Oh, good.  (Laughter.)  Okay.

Q    But I did want to go back to the CR briefly.  You praised Senators Manchin and Brown.  Obviously their tactic right now seems to be to force a government shutdown in hopes of getting a minor provision for the full year -- minor funding.  And they've also -- I think there's this dispute over the California water issue that seems unresolved.  So is the President willing to veto legislation over this?  And do you support sort of the tactics that could lead to a government shutdown here, even if it's just a brief one over the weekend?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, I haven't brought out my veto pen.

Q    But you've got, like, I don't know, 10 hours at this point, right?

MR. SCHULTZ:  We do have 10 hours and, unfortunately, Republicans have run out the clock.  There's no reason it had to come to this point.  They've had majorities in both chambers and they've also known this deadline was coming.  This wasn't something that should have caught them by surprise.

So we do support efforts to care for the minors.  These are benefits that they've accumulated over decades of work, and so we do support efforts to try and restore the benefits that they deserve.

Q    But you're not willing to threaten a veto and you're not willing to say that you think the government should shut down at this point?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, again, I know those conversations are ongoing.  I know that it's bewildering to me why we even need to have conversations about this.  I don't understand why Republicans are picking a fight over minors in coal country who've worked for decades in treacherous conditions and who have earned the exact benefits that Democrats want to provide to them.

Q    Well, what about on the water provision?  I guess, like that -- I mean, that's Democrats being unable to agree with each other about what to do.

MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, I'm not sure we see it that way, Justin. The problem with the Flint provision is that Republicans aren't putting their money where their mouth is --

Q    They passed funding for Flint.  The problem is that the two senators from California, who are both Democrats, can't agree on what the water plan that is attached to the Flint bill should be.

MR. SCHULTZ:  So, in other words, we, for months, heard Republicans talk a lot about the people of Flint and the support they need.  But when it comes time to actually funding the people of Flint and making sure they have the support and resources they need, we have to tie it to another totally unrelated bill that has problems in it that's passage is in question?  Why can't we just do this by the books and play it straight, and get the people of Flint the funding they need?

There's $170 million worth of funding in there, but without specific authorization language, it's really unclear whether that funding can actually get to the people of Flint.

Q    All right, last one.  The Vice President is up in Canada.  I'm wondering if you anticipate any movement during his trip on the softwood lumber dispute.  And there was a petition filed a few weeks ago -- I don't think we've talked about it yet -- but whether you guys anticipate the Commerce Department taking up this issue --

MR. SCHULTZ:  If Josh was here, he'd have a pun.  I don't have one.  (Laughter.)  But I can tell you that I haven't heard the Vice President make any news on this on his trip.  And I haven't heard from the Commerce Department if they plan to take this up, so you might want to just check with them.

Tamara.  Welcome back.

Q    Thank you.  It's good to be back.  On the assessment that's being done, the review that's being done, is there an effort to get this done quickly, before the President leaves because the President-elect has said publically that he doesn't think Russia was involved or that there was a 400-pound man somewhere in a basement involved?  Is there an effort to, like, get this out and on the record before the new administration comes in?

MR. SCHULTZ:  I think the President wanted this done under his watch because he takes it very seriously.  And this is something that the President has been monitoring closely for all eight years now.  We placed a huge premium on cybersecurity, and that's actually reflected in how we've done business over the past eight years.  If you look at our budget that we released *last[this] year, we include significant resources for cybersecurity.  Unfortunately, Congress hasn’t done a thing about it.

A more concrete data point would be look at how we've handled this past year.  In the summer and fall, we noticed an increase in probing and scanning of state election systems.  As a result, the President ordered his Department of Homeland Security to respond.  And what we did is we stood up resources at the Department of Homeland Security, which engaged state offices around the country, nearly every state.  And we deployed experts; we worked with them to bolster their defense systems; we shared best practices.  And we convened conference calls and communications to share the latest information as we learned it.

So this is something the President has been focused on for a while.  But, yes, in the wake of the election, in the wake of this pattern that we've seen fairly regularly in recent elections here at the presidential level in the United States, the President wanted to make sure that we were executing on an after-action look at what we've noticed over the past few years.

Q    The President has spoken with some regularity it seems to the President-elect.  Has he told President-elect Trump about his review?  And was there any reaction?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Tamara, we have acknowledged that the President and President-elect have spoken.  I think we're up to a handful of times.  But what we don't do is we don't read out those conversations, in order to protect the President’s ability to have confidential conversations with the President-elect.

Q    And when stakeholders will be told about the results of this, would those stakeholders include people like Hillary Clinton and the Trump campaign?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Again, I think we just announced that this review is going to be underway.  So as soon as we have a rollout plan for when it’s submitted, we’ll let you know.

Jordan.

Q    Eric, I want to ask you about another pending piece of legislation, which is the defense policy bill.  The Senate passed it 24 hours ago.  Will the President sign it?

MR. SCHULTZ:  We did see its passage.  As Josh said, it’s a 3,000-page bill.  So we are reviewing it.  As we've said, there are some things we were relieved to see in it, like a lack of the budgetary gimmicks that have been a hallmark of Republican governing over the past few years.  Those aren’t in it.  There’s some concern we have, like the permission to restrict -- to prevent our ability to close the prison at Guantanamo Bay.

So I don't have a new position for you at this time.

Q    I mean -- I guess the last time you guys threatened a veto over the bill, but signed it anyway over the Gitmo provisions.  Are we to read that you're just going to sign it again from --

MR. SCHULTZ:  You have an accurate recollection of modern history.

Q    Okay.

MR. SCHULTZ:  Hans.

Q    I just want to follow up on what the review is going to encompass.  Should we be thinking of it as something that's going to be looking at Russia, or follow the facts wherever they may lead if that includes other either state actors or non-state actors?

MR. SCHULTZ:  The latter.  So, in other words --

Q    So this isn’t going to be a global review.  It’s looking more at vulnerabilities of U.S. election processes and then it will follow the facts wherever they go?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, in other words, the intrusion that I mentioned in 2008 was publicly attributed to the Chinese, not to the Russians.  So, yes, we will be looking at all foreign actors and any attempt to interfere with the elections.

Q    And that's state and non-state?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Again, we should check in with the agencies who are charged with actually conducting the review.  But I don't think they're going to take a -- this isn’t going to be a narrow dive, this is going to be a deep dive into this troubling pattern.

Q    And the other side of that question is will you be looking at Russian influence or other non-state actor influences outside of U.S. elections?  Because in your answer you mentioned Europe and Eurasia.  Will you be -- will you follow this to say if they interfered in an election in Central America, South America?  How far will it take you?

MR. SCHULTZ:  I know that the United States’ government and other governments have acknowledged that Russia participates in these sort of activities around the world.  I’m not sure that this particular review will look into those episodes around the world.  So I can't really confirm that it will be included in this review.

Kevin.

Q    Thanks, Eric.  I want to ask you about something that happened in Germany.  To loud applause, Chancellor Angela Merkel told her party members this week that Germany should ban full-face veils wherever legally possible.  What does the White House have to say about that decision, considering the strong ties that the President and the Chancellor have had over the last eight years?

MR. SCHULTZ:  You're right, Kevin.  The President -- I don't think there’s a world leader that the President has worked closer with than Chancellor Merkel.  They most recently had an opportunity in Berlin a few weeks ago now.  You were with us.  And they've worked together on everything from national security to the refugee crisis, to climate change, to the Iran deal.  And they have a very close working relationship.

I think it’s significant that on the President’s final foreign trip, he went out of his way literally to go to Germany as a way to, A, express gratitude for the Chancellor’s hard work on a whole host of issue; and B, as a symbolic gesture that the relationship between the United States and Germany is as strong as it's ever been, and because of that cooperation we've been able to accomplish great things over the past eight years.  So the President, when he travels to countries like Germany, continues to speak out on democratic values.

I don't know if we have issued a position on this.  I did see those reports from Germany.  But again, the President’s views on this are clear, that in this country we have a strong tradition of freedom of speech, freedom of expression, freedom of religion, and so the President frequently will speak out on those obviously when he’s here at home, but also when he’s abroad.

Q    On the CR -- and I don't want to make more of this than has already been mentioned in the room, but I'm just curious -- if you're a senior, if you are -- it can be something as simple as going to the Army-Navy game, and you're wondering what happens if this doesn’t get wrapped up.  What’s your message to the folks who are watching at home and wondering?  They’re not awash in this sort of policy on a day-to-day basis.  They see the headline, and many of them are obviously concerned.

MR. SCHULTZ:  I'll get very specific.  So if it is apparent late Friday evening or early Saturday that a new CR is likely to be enacted on Saturday, our Office of Management and Budget will instruct agencies to operate at a normal manner and not engage in a shutdown procedure.

If OMB determines late Friday or early Saturday that a CR is not likely to be enacted, we will issue instructions for agencies to proceed with their shutdown implementation.  That includes the orderly shutdown by non-exempted employees.  And agencies will need to work through their own furlough issues for days that are traditionally open for the federal government.  I know it falls over the weekend, so we'll be looking at that.

But, look, individual agencies are required to have updated shutdown plans that outline activities that will take place during the shutdown.  So if you have specific questions about what will be open and what wouldn't be open you should check in with those agencies.

Thank you.

Kenneth.

Q    Hey, Eric.  To go back to the review for one more question.  If the goal is to obviously figure out if there was an attempt to interfere with the elections and past elections and share that with stakeholders, with Congress.  Obviously we're talking about this broad review that's going to be pretty in-depth.  Is there a concern that the next administration -- is the goal for the next administration to take some action as well, since the President only has 40 days left?  And if so, is there a concern that the next administration -- President-elect Donald Trump, President-elect Trump won't act on that?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, in terms of what the next administration will do, it's hard for me to speculate on that.  So I'd refer you to the President-elect’s team.  I do think -- this exact issue surfaced a little bit earlier this week when -- well, maybe it was Friday -- when the President’s Commission on Enhancing National Cybersecurity released its report, which was a deep dive unrelated to the election, but looking at cybersecurity infrastructure around the United States.  And there were some pieces in there that were actionable that we could probably work on and improve over the next 40-45 days while the President is still in office.  But there’s a whole host of recommendations in that report that will not be able to be implemented in the next 45 days.

So this is going to be a challenge.  I don't think it's a controversial statement to say this will be a challenge for the next administration and the next Congress.  We hope that Congress puts a little bit more muscle into funding a lot of the requests for better resources and better support.  But, yes, this will be a problem that outlives this administration.  And I do think that the report that was released Friday and presumably the report that gets turned in based on this review can provide a road map for future administrations to tackle this.

Q    And, Eric, I don't think I heard you say -- and forgive me if you did -- has the President reached out to Senate leadership on the CR, or any senators who have -- like Senator Manchin who’s had a stake in this with fighting for coal miners  -- has there been some type of communication?

MR. SCHULTZ:  I don't have any presidential conversations to read out to you.  I can confirm there were about 300 to 400 members of Congress here last night for the congressional balls, so I wouldn't be surprised if there were conversations in the photo line or elsewhere in the East Wing on this.  But I can assure you that members of Congress know precisely where we stand.  I know our Office of Legislative Affairs is in touch with both Democrats and Republicans on this.  So there shouldn’t be any question as to our position.

Q    And, Eric, also -- so the President-elect's Labor Secretary is a vocal critic of many of the President's initiatives -- so raising the minimum wage, expanding overtime pay eligibility.  He wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act.  So what impact do you think he'll have on workers, on labor?  Is there a concern there?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, again, I'm not going to be in a position to speculate on what the incoming President's team -- what policies they will implement and the results of those policies.  We can only just speak for ourselves.  And I think the record that we've produced is one to be proud of, and it's one, I think, that the next administration will be judged against.  Hopefully, it's one that future administrations for some time will be judged against.

As you recall, when we took office, the unemployment rate was at 10 percent.  Governor Romney famously said that he could bring it down to 6 percent.  We actually hit that earlier than expected, and right now it's at 4.6 percent.  So we feel good about our record, which, again, includes the longest stretch of private sector job growth on record.  Businesses have added 15.6 million jobs over the last 81 months.  And so wages have started to accelerate in recent years.  So we feel good about the progress we've made.

I'll give you one example of something specifically that we've worked on.  In the 2015 State of the Union, the President called for an increase in the minimum wage.  Congress has not lifted a finger to do that under Republican direction, but some states have and some private companies have, and some localities have.  I believe we're now up to 18 states and the District of Columbia which have raised the minimum wage.  My colleagues at the Council of Economic Advisers released a report a few days ago that looked at the impact of raising the minimum wage in those states.  They found that wages went up, and they found that there was no adverse impact on business interests.

So that's an argument that we frequently hear from Republicans.  Maybe under the next administration they can take more direct action to increase wages, because that's something we've been focused on.  Unfortunately, we've had a recalcitrant Congress refusing to do so.

Q    And finally, has the President had a chance to reach out to the family of John Glenn?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Kenneth, I don’t have any calls on that to read out to you.  As you saw, we released a statement yesterday from the President.  I think it's clear that Senator Glenn is someone who enjoyed the admiration, and captured the imagination, of the American people.  He's an American hero and a true public servant.  He's a decorated Marine Corps pilot from World War II in Korea.  He was the first American to orbit the Earth.  And he served in the United States with unimpeachable integrity.  He's someone who fought for science and technology.  He was a thought leader on these issues, and not just while he was in the Senate, but for years after.

So our thoughts and prayers are with his family.  POTUS was proud to award him the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2012.  And we thank him and his family for their service.

Mark.

Q    Yeah, Eric, one more on the hacking.  To what degree -- or is this at all a response to the Senate Democrats who wrote you I guess earlier this week and -- the ones who say, look, we need more evidence to back up this general assertion that we've had, and that you would then -- so how much of this review is to decide what can actually be made public to bolster the argument that the intelligence community has made?

MR. SCHULTZ:  None.  So that will be a separate process.  So as we've acknowledged here, we've received a request from members of Congress for briefings on this.  And I think as Josh made clear yesterday, we have been briefing them on this.  There are certain committees with unique jurisdiction on these issues, so we make sure we brief them.  Some of that has been classified briefings; some have been unclassified.  But we're also in touch with all members of Congress, because we know there's wide interest on this.

So we're happy to conduct those briefings.  We're also happy to go through the process to figure out if there can be more material that is unclassified in response to those requests.  But this review is unrelated to requests by Congress.  This is something the President directed his national security team to conduct.

Q    Okay.  Can I also you about the climate resilience area that the President has just declared?  What's the rationale behind it?  And is this, as some Republicans have been warning us about, the beginning of a raft of environmental rules that you're going to close out and rush before the inauguration?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Mark, as you point out, this was something released, I believe, a short while ago; announced in Alaska.  And it's in response to requests we've gotten from indigenous people up there that the coastal tribes along the Northern Bering Sea and the Bering Strait requested that the federal government take this action to protect the health of marine ecosystems of the Northern Bering Sea while maintaining opportunities for sustainable fishing and sustainable economic development.

So this was the right decision to make.  If you have more questions about it, we can get you the details.  But the idea that this is a preview of additional actions to come, I wouldn’t read that into it.  Again, here, under this President's direction, we make decisions on the merits.  And as the President as indicated, we're going to continue to do our job until January 20th.  So I don’t have any additional actions to preview.

Fred.

Q    Thanks.  I have a couple things I want to ask about.  First of all, it's reported that President-elect Trump has asked -- or is picking Cathy McMorris Rodgers to be his Interior Secretary.  The President -- she's part of the Republican leadership.  The President has -- or the White House has worked with her in some capacity.  I wondered if you had any thoughts of her in that particular role, given her voting record on environmental and energy issues.

MR. SCHULTZ:  Fred, I -- like we have generally done, I don’t have a lot to say about the President-elect's team.  Obviously, when you select a member of Congress, you have a long record that's attached to you.  So I'm going to let others sort of dig deep into that record and what that might mean for policies that the next administration pursues.

Q    And any thoughts on -- I mean, just from your experience and your knowledge on her record on some of these issues, aside from the Cabinet position.

MR. SCHULTZ:  It's a fair question.  The posture that we've taken here, though, is that Donald Trump was elected President on November 8th, and it's not the candidate that the President campaigned for.  It's not the candidate who offered policies the President agrees with.  But in light of the election results, we're going to allow that president the respect he deserves in order to -- that President-elect the space he needs to put together his team.

That was not something afforded to this President.  As you know, we faced fierce opposition on some of our nominees, even though they came to office -- they came to these positions with unimpeachable integrity and high qualifications.  But the President feels strongly that our priority now needs to be allowing the President-elect to take office in about 40 days, and do so with a team that he selects.

Q    On some other question -- I have asked before about possible executive actions.  So just maybe get an update on this -- any (inaudible) or movement.  A couple things that have been out there -- former President Carter has said that the President should take some type of executive action on possibly a Palestinian state, either through U.S. recognition or just not vetoing a U.N. resolution.  Another issue that's been out there  -- some House Democrats have -- they sent a letter, they've advocated using the pardon power for DREAMers.  Has the President ruled either of those out?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Fred, on the former, I know that the former President Carter had an op-ed piece out today.  I haven't had a chance to take a close look at it, but clearly he is someone who has strong views about that region.  And so I don't think those views are new today, so I don't have any new positions or views from us on that.

On the ask from House Democrats, there is a process at the Department of Justice to review pardon applications.  The President has said he is not going to do anything to circumvent that process.  What he has done in recent years is bolster resources at the Department of Justice to make sure they are at maximum capacity to have all the bandwidth they need to review applications.  So that process continues in earnest.

I expect that process to continue for the rest of the time the President is office.  But we're going to also respect that process at the Department of Justice.

Q    You're not ruling out anything on Palestinian statehood, but you're saying no -- to the second question?

MR. SCHULTZ:  I'm saying that I don't have anything new to offer on that first issue that's a departure from our positions.

John.

Q    The last few times Congress has needed a CR and kind of taken it to the last hours, the President seems to have mostly stayed out of it.  But as the countdown clock may appear on cable news shortly, as head of government, does he feel any responsibility at some point this afternoon, this evening, to get involved in the talk -- to try to find some resolution?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, again, I don't have any presidential conversations to read out at this point.  I can say to you that it's quite clear whose responsibility this is; that if Republicans -- maybe if Republicans didn't control both chambers or maybe if they only controlled one, or maybe if they didn't control either, they could sort of shirk this.  But I'm not sure that's going to hold water at this point.

So, yes, the President does want to avoid a government shutdown.  That's a bedrock principle of this President over the past eight years.  Unfortunately, Republicans haven't always shared that principle, so we'll have to see now if they want to dig in and have their support for coalminers questioned, whether they think this is a fight worth having.  That's going to be a question they need to resolve.

Goyal, I'll give you the last one, and then we'll do the week ahead.

Q    Thank you very much, a couple questions.  One, many people, especially women around the globe, are wondering that America is not ready for a female President.  Many countries, including India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Israel, even Liberia, and now UK and Germany.  My question is that Madam Hillary Clinton wasn't elected to be the first female President.  Is America ready for a female President?  Or it's a man's world?  People are asking around the globe.

MR. SCHULTZ:  Goyal, we should just remember that Secretary Clinton has made history several times.  She was the first First Lady ever elected to the United States Senate in her own right.  She was the first woman to be a nominee of a major party for the presidency.  And so she's made an awful lot of history and she's broken a lot of barriers herself.

As we've said, November 8th she didn't get elected President of the United States.  I quibble perhaps with the presumption in your question that America isn't ready for this when she got more votes than the Republican nominee.  So she got about 2.5 million more votes than Donald Trump, but that isn't going to get you much when you don't win the Electoral College.  So she came up short in this election.

But I think that there is going to be a lot of analysis about why that happened.  But in terms of the inspiration that she provided women of all ages throughout her career and her lifetime of public service, I don't think that's in question at all.

Q    As far as President-elect Trump is concerned, he also made history, and he is a household name around the globe.  My question is that he comes from the business community, and I’m sure he’s going to run America like a business.  So where do we stand as far as the U.S.-India business future is concerned under President Trump?  Because now under President Obama, we had great relations between the two countries as far as commerce, trade, and recently last week signed agreement with Boeing and other.  India will be making some U.S. airplanes and fighter jets.  But President Trump -- or elect-President Trump is saying that it might change.  So where do we stand, the future of U.S.-India trade?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Sure.  Goyal, this might be disappointing, but it’s not going to be surprising that I’m just not going to be in a position to weigh in on positions that the next President might take when they assume office.  They’ll have ample opportunity to express those and field your questions.

I can speak to the relations between India and the United States under this administration.  And they're as strong as ever. The President has worked closely with Prime Minister Modi on a whole host of issues, ranging from national security, to climate, to trade, to commerce, and to strong people-to-people ties.  We have a rich history and shared values.  The President is proud of that record.  And the President is proud of the steps we've taken to increase the ties between our two countries over the past eight years.

Q    And one more, if I may.  Tomorrow is Human Rights Day  -- or international, global Human Rights Day.  And many women around the globe -- freedom of the press, freedom of religion, and blasphemy laws in the Saudi Arabia and in Pakistan.  People are under attack.  And especially in Saudi Arabia, women and in Pakistan, and the community of (inaudible), Hindis, and also minorities.  So where do we stand?  Any message from the President as far as universal Human Rights Day is concerned?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Sure.  I know that's an important day.  But the President speaks out about this throughout the calendar.  And like we've discussed, the President believes strongly in human rights.  He wants those adhered to strictly here in the United States.  But he also hasn’t been afraid to raise those issues around the world.  Sometimes that's when he travels.  Sometimes that's when he -- that's when we have foreign leaders here visiting in the United States.

But the President gave a speech earlier this week where in a different context he talked about freedom of press, freedom of expression, freedom to criticize your own leadership.  Those are democratic values.  But we think those are consistent with human rights that should be afforded to people around the world, that countries are stronger when they respect human rights, when they respect decency and values of their own people.

Q    And as far as China -- as well as talking about China on human rights, they don't care.  They are telling that don't preach us, don't give us any lecture on human rights.

MR. SCHULTZ:  Sure.  It’s a good point, that the President raises this every time he is in China or meeting with his counterpart.  And it’s not only raised at the presidential level, but all counterparts -- everyone in this administration raises these issues.  We did it most recently when we were in China.  But I can't think of a single visit where the President didn't raise human rights in the context of our relationship with the Chinese.

Q    Thanks, Eric.

MR. SCHULTZ:  Good.  I’ll do the week ahead.

On Monday, the President will attend meetings here at the White House.

On Tuesday, the President will sign the 21st Century Cures Act.  The President and Vice President will deliver remarks at this event.

On Wednesday, the President host two Hanukkah receptions here at the White House.  The First Lady will attend both.

And on Thursday, the President will be here at the White House for meetings.

And on Friday, the President will depart the White House en route Honolulu, Hawaii for his final Hawaii holiday vacation while President of the United States.

Q    When is the news conference?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Stay tuned.

Q    (Inaudible.)

MR. SCHULTZ:  No.

Q    Eric?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Yes.

Q    You didn't give me a chance to counter about that Energy Department questionnaire the Trump transition team sent out.  It seems like people who have worked on the President’s climate change agenda were being asked certain questions about did they, in fact, work on it.  Were you guys read in on this or briefed on this?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Kenneth, I saw some news reports on this before we came out.  And for questions about the President-elect team’s questioning of civil servants or targeting of civil servants, you should check in with the President-elect’s team.

All I can tell you is that President Obama is enormously proud of the work of civil servants and federal workers across the administration; that over the past eight years, they've worked to make this country stronger.  And they don't do so out of a sense of great pay or because the hours are great.  They do so out of a sense of patriotism.  And the President is proud of their record.

Q    So no concern of employees being targeted?

MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, again, we just saw some news reports on this before heading out here.  So if you have questions about activity that the President-elect’s team is doing, you should check in with them and try and figure out why they're doing it.

Thanks.

Q    And personally, I just want to thank the President and First Lady for the White House party invitation.

MR. SCHULTZ:  Good.  Thank you, Goyal.

END
2:06 P.M. EST
1:11 P.M. EST

MR. EARNEST:  After last night’s late arrival, we're moving a little slower than usual today.  So appreciate your patience.  I do not have any statements at the top, Josh, so we can go straight to questions if you want to kick us off.

Q    Sure, thanks, Josh.  Let me start with the summary that was provided to President-elect Trump last week about -- by the intelligence community about unsubstantiated compromising information that was obtained by Russia.  Was President Obama also briefed by the IC either on paper or in person about that report?

MR. EARNEST:  Josh, what I can tell you is that as a general matter I've not been in a position to read out publicly the details of the intelligence briefings that the President receives.  What I have previously confirmed, though, is that President Obama did receive a briefing on the report that was compiled by the intelligence community at the President’s direction on Russia’s nefarious activities to undermine public confidence in the 2016 election.  The President received that briefing the day before the unclassified version of that report was released.  That was last Thursday.  But for the contents of that briefing, or for the contents of the classified report, for that matter, that's not something I can speak to.

Q    Without getting into the content of it, what you were just discussing was information that was provided to the President about Russia’s cyber interference with the U.S. campaign.  This seems to be slightly different.  This isn't about John Podesta’s emails or hacking the DNC.  This would be about trying to obtain compromising information on Trump.  Without talking about the details of it, can you say whether that was part of the briefing that the President received?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think that gets -- you're asking me directly about the content of the report.  And as we discussed before, it's certainly understandable that people would be interested in trying to understand what’s included there, but that's just not something that I can discuss.

Just to clarify one aspect of your question, the report that was released does discuss in detail the malicious cyber activity that was perpetrated by Russia on political entities in the United States -- in both parties, by the way -- to undermine public confidence in the election.  But that wasn’t the only tactic that they used.  Certainly the release of that hacked material -- there’s a discussion of this fake news phenomenon in the report, as well -- so it's important to understand that the report that was compiled by the intelligence community goes beyond just the malicious cyber activity that Russia engaged in.

Q    You talked quite a bit from the podium about the importance of a smooth transition, and the President has, as well.  Is this administration doing anything to try to stem what appears to be significant leaks from the intelligence community aimed at punching back at Trump?

MR. EARNEST:  Josh, I think I'm on the record as much as anybody in talking about the need to protect classified information.  And there are previous situations in which I've expressed concern about the willingness of individuals to talk about classified activity publicly -- or classified information publicly, and I don't have the luxury of doing that.  I stand before all of you speaking on the record, on camera, and I have a responsibility to protect classified information.

There are other people who use the cloak of anonymity to disseminate that information, and that's something that has happened not just throughout this presidency, but that's something that's been happening certainly over the course of many previous Presidents as well.  That's not to okay it, but it certainly is a frequent occurrence.

Q    And it's one thing to sort of talk publicly about the need to protect classified information.  It's another thing to do something proactively to try to stop what appears to be leaks.  Certainly there have been other instances where news organizations or others who receive leaks there have been investigations by this administration into that.  So I'm just curious whether the White House is going back to these people and saying, you’ve got to button this up, you can't be doing this.  Or is it just sort of talking about it from the podium?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think a couple of things, Josh.  I think, first of all, the White House has been extraordinarily conscientious in protecting classified information.  And that is something that the President expects, particularly with regard to leaks.  And the President is proud of that.

With regard to leak investigations, all of you have talked about -- rather critically, in fact -- some of the efforts that the administration has undertaken to protect classified information.  Questions about prosecuting individuals who are engaging in criminal conduct or leaking information that is punishable under the criminal law, those kinds of prosecutorial investigative decisions are made at the FBI.  And those decisions are made free of any sort of political interference, and certainly made free of any interference from the White House.  But I've said on a number of occasions that I believe it's important for everybody in the U.S. government who’s entrusted with access to classified information to uphold their oath to protect it.

Q    Secretary of State Rex Tillerson -- nominee Rex Tillerson was on the Hill -- is on the Hill today, testifying.  And he’s suggesting that he could be even tougher on Russia than the Obama administration in certain respects.  Particularly, he said that what the administration should have done after Russia seized Crimea was to send defensive weapons and air surveillance assets to the Ukrainians.  Is the outgoing administration sufficiently convinced that Tillerson, if confirmed, would be tough enough on Russia, and do you have any response to sort of his second-guessing of the way that this administration handled the Ukraine issue?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, with regard to appraising Mr. Tillerson’s candidacy, I'll leave that to the men and women of the United States Senate to evaluate.  It's their responsibility to determine whether or not this is an individual who is capable of representing the United States and serving in the President’s cabinet.

And that's why we have a process where the United States Senate offers advice and consent to the President in choosing those nominees, and that certainly is why those nominees have to undergo rigorous background checks, comply with ethical regulations that ensure that they don't have conflicts of interest that could impact their judgment or raise questions about their judgment.  And this is also why the Congress holds hearings to try to understand how a nominee would approach some of these issues once in office.

But I'm going to leave to individual members of the Senate to pass judgment.  That's not something that I'll do from here.  It certainly would undermine our commitment to a smooth and effective transition if I spent a lot of time critiquing the performance of the nominees when they’re testifying before Congress.

With regard to the policy that we have used in Ukraine, what I can tell you is that this administration has been strongly supportive of the efforts of the Ukrainian people and the Ukrainian government to counter flagrant attempts by the Russians to violate their sovereignty and their territorial integrity.  And there are a variety of forms of assistance that the United States has provided -- certainly extensive financial assistance to try to strengthen their economy.

Obviously President Obama had been a leading advocate in communicating with the world and in communicating with Russia about the need to resolve this conflict and certainly to deescalate it.  And the President has been strongly supportive of the efforts of European leaders to pursue a process to try to broker a diplomatic agreement between Ukraine and Russia.

Implementing that agreement has been challenging and we've not made nearly as much progress on that score as we would like. The United States has also worked closely with our allies in Europe to impose tough sanctions against Russia that we know have had a negative impact on Russia’s economy.  And we do know that since those sanctions were put in place, Russia’s economy has been faltering.  Some of that is because of the global price of oil, but limiting their access to international financial markets and limiting their access to some of their most prominent and important trading partners surely hasn’t helped.  And that's a price that Russia has had to pay.

Russia, based on a decision that was made by the United States and our allies, is not participating in G8 meetings anymore.  Those meetings are now called G7 meetings, and Russia doesn’t participate.  So Russia has faced intense isolation because of their flagrant violation of Ukraine's sovereignty.

So our response to Russia's involvement in Ukraine has been tough.  It has had an impact, and there have been negative consequences.  But ultimately, if the incoming administration chooses to escalate that situation militarily, that would be a different conclusion than this administration reached with regard to our interests and the interests of our friends in Ukraine.  But somebody else will be calling those shots in the afternoon of January 20th.

Q    And just lastly, did the President catch any of the President-elect's news conference today?

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t know that President Obama had an opportunity to watch the news conference live, but I'm confident that he's following the news coverage of it.

Julia.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  One of the things that President-elect Trump touched on today was he actually said that he does think that Russia was behind the hack into the DNC.  That was really the furthest he's come on that subject so far.

MR. EARNEST:  He also said it could be others -- at the end of it.

Q    Sure.  But the point he then followed with is that it was an equal opportunity hack; that, really, the reason why the DNC was exposed was because the RNC just had better cyber protections in place.  Is it your understanding that both parties were equally targeted in these cyber intrusions during the campaign, and it just came down to a matter of security?  Or was it more targeted than that?

MR. EARNEST:  Julia, I think what I would do is I would just point you to the key judgments of the report that was issued by the intelligence community last week.  And in these key judgments -- let me just read one sentence, one bullet from those key judgments.  It simply says, "Russia's intelligence services conducted cyber operations against targets associated with the 2016 presidential election, including targets associated with both major U.S. political parties."  So that is the judgment of the FBI, the CIA, and the NSA that compiled this report with the support of the Director of National Intelligence.  So I do think it is another illustration of the Russian motive.

And this is another finding of the report about the clear assessment of the intelligence community that Russia's aim was to disadvantage Secretary Clinton and give a boost to Mr. Trump's campaign.  That certainly would explain the aggressive effort to hack Democrats and the refusal to release information about Republicans in a damaging way that had also been obtained by the Russians.

Q    But should the DNC have gone further to protect itself or to cooperate with the FBI?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I'll refer you to the DNC for what sort of cooperation was in place with regard to the FBI.  And I also can't speak to what sort of cyber defenses they had in place back in 2015.  That's something that they can speak to.

Q    One thing I'm wondering if you could speak to as well from the press conference was President-elect Trump's moves to distance himself from his business interests by placing his business in the hands of his sons, but he did not go so far as to completely divest or to set up a blind trust.  He's bringing in an ethics advisor.  Could you say whether or not the White House thinks that that goes far enough to really separate the future President from any conflicts of interest when he takes office?

MR. EARNEST:  I'm obviously not in a position to offer any sort of expert judgment or analysis of the steps that the President-elect announced earlier today.  All I can tell you is that President Obama chose a very different approach.  I would acknowledge at the front end that their financial situations are quite different, but President Obama's approach was quite different, nonetheless.  And President Obama's approach was to liquidate virtually all of his assets and put them into Treasury bills.

And as I've observed on a couple of occasions, that was a very good decision for the country.  It was a very poor decision for the financial standing of the Obama family.  This was a time when the Federal Reserve was slashing interest rates to deal with the Great Recession, and that made the return on Treasury bills very small.  But President Obama was pleased to make the financial sacrifice because it was in the best interest of the country.  He also believed that it ended up serving the administration quite well.

Essentially, he set a standard at the very top that everyone else in his administration has also followed.  And President Obama is quite proud of the fact that there has not been a major personal or ethical scandal during his eight years in office.  And some of that is because of the ethical -- of the tone that he set from the earliest days of his presidency about the extraordinarily high ethical standard that he and other senior members of his administration would be following.

Toluse.



Q    Thanks, Josh.  During the press conference today, President-elect Trump said that the intelligence community was disgraceful to let out the information that was published in BuzzFeed.  He compared the intelligence community to Nazi Germany.  I wonder if you have any response to that.

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, as President Obama has said many times, the men and women of our intelligence community are patriots.  They do their important work not because the paycheck is large -- many of them are experts that could command a much higher salary in the private sector.  They aren’t engaged in this work because they’re going to get a lot of personal glory and credit for their service -- most of the men and women who serve in the intelligence community actually do their work in secret.  Their identities will never be known.  We will never have an opportunity to thank them personally for their service and sacrifice for this country.

These are men and women who served our country under Democratic and Republican Presidents, and they made a decision when they began their career to set aside their own personal and ideological views, and focus solely on the facts, and focus solely on marshaling and presenting the most insightful analysis and the most accurate, relevant and timely facts to the President and other national security decision-makers so that they can make the best decisions about what's necessary to protect the country.

And the leadership of the intelligence under President Obama reflects that lifetime commitment to service.  And there were some not-so-subtle references to questioning the integrity and motives of the leaders of the intelligence community.

Jim Clapper serves as the Director of National Intelligence -- has for almost six years now.  He’s somebody who enlisted in the Marine Corps in 1961.  Since then he’s been serving his country.  He flew dozens of combat missions over Southeast Asia as a pilot, and he is somebody who has served Presidents in both parties as a high-ranking military official and as a high-ranking official in our intelligence community.

Certainly somebody like Jim Comey, the Director of the FBI, was a high-ranking political appointee of the Bush administration.  He was somebody who was confirmed almost unanimously in the United States Senate.  Strong majorities of Democrats and Republicans signed up to support him because of his well-established reputation for integrity.  That certainly is the reason that President Obama chose him for the job.

And similar things can be said about John Brennan, who dedicated more than two decades of his career to serving our country in the CIA.  That included some service in countries overseas with whom the United States has very sensitive, complicated relationships, and he served Presidents in both parties.

Admiral Mike Rogers, Director of the NSA, is somebody who has had a distinguished career in the United States military, and he has held those senior positions -- a variety of senior positions under Presidents in both parties.

So I think it is deeply misguided for anybody, at any level, to question the integrity and motives of the patriots who serve in our intelligence community.  Doesn’t mean they’re always right, but questioning their motives is another thing altogether.

Q    I also wanted to ask what this administration thinks about Vladimir Putin and whether he’s a war criminal.  That’s a question that came up in the hearings for Secretary of State.  Rex Tillerson seemed to not want to use that label to describe Putin.  Is that something that this administration believes is appropriate for a label for Vladimir Putin?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware that that designation or that label has been used by any senior officials in this administration.  Obviously we have, on a number of occasions, expressed profound concern about some of the tactics used by the Russian government under the leadership of President Putin.  The willingness of the Russian government to punish journalists, to target political opponents, has created a human rights situation in Russia that’s troubling.  But I’ve not heard anybody apply that label -- at least nobody in the Obama administration apply that label to him.

Q    One more on -- Trump basically said during his press conference that Obamacare was imploding on its own and Democrats should be happy that he’s putting for -- he’s going to put forward a plan to vote to repeal it and replace the law simultaneously.  What’s your reaction to that?  And do you have a preference for whether or not there is a gap between repeal and replace, or whether it’s done, you know, as he said, on the same week or on the same day?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what is certainly true is to repeal the law without a replacement would create chaos not just for those Americans who purchased their health insurance through the Obamacare marketplace, but for all Americans, including the vast majority of Americans who purchase their health insurance through their employer.

To repeal the Affordable Care Act without a replacement would inject an unprecedented level of uncertainty into the broader health care market.  This is a significant portion of our economy we’re talking about here.  So that would be a really bad thing for the country.  It would be bad for our economy.  It certainly would be bad for millions of Americans who rely on their health insurance to protect their family’s financial situation but also to protect their own health.

With regard to the plans that are put forward by the incoming administration, you’ve heard me say this before -- I’ll give you the short version, and it’s simply this.  At some point -- based on the President-elect’s comments today, that point may come sooner rather than later -- I would expect that the incoming Secretary of the Health and Human Services, Mr. Price, if he’s confirmed, will be standing before you, maybe even right at this podium, in this room, to present the health care plan that was put forward by the Trump administration.  And what I would urge you to do is to evaluate that plan on its merits.

President Obama, with Obamacare, has established an extraordinarily high benchmark.  Since President Obama signed that bill into law, 20 million more Americans got access to health care.  These are Americans that didn’t previously have health insurance coverage that do now.  That has reduced the uninsured rate in this country to historic lows.

What we have also seen is we have limited the growth in employer premiums to 3.4 percent last year.  That’s a much lower inflation rate than before the Affordable Care Act was signed into law.

The Affordable Care Act includes sweeping protections for people that have a preexisting condition, for women who previously could be charged more by their insurance company just because they are women -- that’s something that has been outlawed.  Parents can now keep their children on their health insurance up until age 26.  That was previously not an option available before the Affordable Care Act was signed into law.

The Affordable Care Act extended the life of Medicare by 11 years.  And the Affordable Care Act, according to independent projections by the CBO, would reduce the deficit by $3 trillion over the next two decades.  That’s a substantial savings.

And the President actually said this last night -- you've all got it on tape -- if the Trump administration can put forward a plan that would exceed these benchmarks and do so at a lower cost, President Obama will support it.  So we'll have an opportunity to see if the Trump administration is up to the task.

Leland.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  A question about the speech from last night.  The President talked about major threats to our democracy, and in that he listed a number of things and they were reminiscent, if you will, of past criticisms of Mr. Trump.  And what I'm wondering is, if you connect those dots, was the President saying that Mr. Trump is a threat to our democracy, or are his followers, based on those things?

MR. EARNEST:  Leland, I can tell you that the President's message was focused on the American people, and urging the American people to be engaged in our democracy to counter the threats, both external to the United States but also some of those threats internally.

And certainly our country has overcome significant internal divisions before -- some even greater than the kind of political divide that we see on display in our current political debate.  But the President was making the case to the country -- both to his supporters and those who do not support him -- that the most effective way to overcome those divisions is for us to look for common ground with our fellow citizens, to assume the best, and to engage in the hard work of democracy, of advocating for the kinds of solutions that will move the country forward.

And the President believes that if the American people pursue that approach, that our country is in -- the future for our country is as bright as it's ever been.  And part of the President's optimism is rooted in this spirit that he has seen in the younger generation of Americans who are committed to fairness and justice and equality, and are civic-minded.  They wanted to see our country succeed and they want to see everyone in our country have an opportunity to get a fair shot and a fair shake. And that gives the President a lot of optimism about the future. But it's going to require a lot of hard work, and the President indicated that he was prepared to engage in that hard work as a citizen himself.

Q    And speaking of something the President might be wanting to work on, he said that race relations are better than they were 10 or 20 years ago.  He said he doesn't need statistics, although he alluded that statistics might support that.  ABC News-Washington Post tracking poll -- 30 percent of people in 2000 said race relations were generally bad.  When the President was elected in 2008, 36 percent:  generally bad.  Today, 63 percent:  generally bad.  So what is the President or the White House pointing to showing that race relations are better than they were 10 or 20 years ago that this poll doesn't suggest?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I think that the President didn't have polling data in mind.  I think the President had in mind other metrics about the success that we've had in closing the achievement gap; in increasing the percentage of Americans from minority groups that are enrolled in college, for example.  We've had some success in closing the wealth gap.  There's more work to be done, but we certainly have moved that in a positive direction.

I think what those polls reflect are actually a somewhat different phenomenon, which is simply that in a modern age, in a modern communications environment, where everybody has got a video-equipped cellphone in their pocket, that we all too often come face to face with the most graphic elements of the racial divide in this country that have yet to be healed.  And that's disconcerting.  In some cases, it's even discouraging to some Americans.  And I think that would explain some of the poll results that you've seen.  But the truth is, those kinds of incidents -- whether they are confrontations between law enforcement officers and young minorities, or a response to those kinds of incidents that show some significant civic discontent and even unrest -- I think is disconcerting to a large portion of the population and prompts some people to despair about the state of race relations in our country.

The truth is, those kinds of things have been happening for generations -- these kinds of confrontations between law enforcement and minorities.  That's not a new thing.  The difference now is that we see it in vivid detail, and our conscience is aroused by that, both out of concern for the safety and security of our brave men and women who serve honorably to protect our communities, but also out of concern for the fair treatment and basic civil rights of people, regardless of the color of their skin.

And the fact that that is not a concern that is just held by Hispanics and African Americans, but rather a concern that the vast majority of Americans of all races hold, I think is also, in and of itself, an illustration of the progress that we've made in making our country as fair and as just as we would like it to be. But I think the President -- the passion in the President's speech was rooted in not just an acknowledgment that there's more work to do, but in a commitment to engage in the difficult work of addressing some of those challenges.  And the President looks forward to doing that as a citizen.

John.

Q    Throughout the campaign, the President consistently questioned really whether President-elect Trump was prepared to assume the office of the presidency.  I'm wondering now if that assessment has changed at all.  He said during the campaign that the presidency is not a reality TV program.  Nine days out, does the President think that he's ready?

MR. EARNEST:  I haven't heard the President put forward an assessment like that.  And the President has strong feelings about this -- he expressed them vividly over the summer and fall of the presidential campaign.  Those sentiments, that opinion was rooted in the President's values about what's best for the country.  They were also rooted in his own personal experience of serving as President of the United States for the last eight years.  But the opportunity to make those arguments and to put forward that kind of assessment expired on Election Day.  In the aftermath of the election, President Obama accepted responsibility for putting aside his own personal political views and focusing on the kind of smooth and effective transition that the American people are counting on.

President Obama, just last night, talked about how much he and his administration benefitted from the professionalism and courtesy and selflessness of the Bush administration as they were transitioning out of office.  I'm confident that President Bush had frustrations and concerns and deep disagreements with the approach that the incoming Obama administration was prepared to pursue, but they were insistent that they were not going to allow those differences of opinion to affect their ability to give President Obama and his team every opportunity to get a running start when they entered the White House.

And President Obama made it a priority earlier this year, before the -- or early last year, before the outcome of the election was known, that regardless of who succeeded him in office, he wanted his team to be prepared to engage in a smooth and effective transition so that the incoming President could have every opportunity to succeed.  And that's what we've been doing since November 9th, the day after the election.

Q    You said on Thursday and Friday of last week that the President had no plans to phone Donald Trump to talk about the briefing that they each received.  Do you know whether they've spoken since last Thursday at all?

MR. EARNEST:  As I mentioned before, I'm going to protect the ability of the President and the President-elect to consult in private, so I don't have any specific telephone calls to tell you about.

Q    On another subject, there are a lot of reports out indicating that as the President's time in office winds down, that Chelsea Manning may be pardoned or sentence commuted.  I'm wondering if you have any update on any of that legal question. And I have a follow-up question.

MR. EARNEST:  I don't have additional information to share about this.  I've refrained from commenting on specific clemency applications that have been filed with the Department of Justice. I was asked just last week about whether or not the President intended to act on the clemency petition that had been put forward by attorneys for former Illinois governor, Rod Blagojevich -- I didn't have any comment on that situation, and I don't have any commentary on any of the paperwork involving Chelsea Manning either.

Q    On April 21st, 2011, the President was talking about then Bradley Manning's case and said, "We are a nation of laws.  We don't let individuals make decisions about how the law operates."  He said, "He broke the law."  Does the President still believe that Chelsea Manning broke the law?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, more importantly, it's not the President's responsibility to serve as judge and jury.  Chelsea Manning, as a member of the United States armed forces, went through a legal proceeding administered by the United States military under the laws that govern the conduct of members of the United States military, and there was a hearing and a conviction and a sentence.  And it all went through that regular process.  And that's the way we determine guilt or innocence in this country, particularly with regard to the conduct of men and women in our armed forces.  And that's the way that our system works.

Q    And my final question is, yesterday a Cubs official confirmed to me that the team will come to the White House on Monday to be honored for their World Series Championship.  I'm hoping to --

MR. EARNEST:  You've got good sources.

Q    Thank you.  I'm hoping you can confirm that news and maybe tell me if it was difficult to arrange that visit in the last few days of the presidency.

MR. EARNEST:  Well, the thing I can tell you, John, is that one of the highlights of my eight years of working in the White House was, earlier this summer, when my hometown Kansas City Royals came to the White House to celebrate their World Series Championship with President Obama.  And I'm pleased to confirm that many of my colleagues here in the West Wing who are themselves Cub fans will get to enjoy exactly the same thing when the Chicago Cubs come to the White House on Monday to celebrate their World Series Championship with President Obama.

Those of us who were -- I, of course, was disappointed that my Royals didn't make the playoffs.  But I think anybody who is a sports fan, even if you're not a baseball fan and not a Cubs fan, appreciated the historic run that the Chicago Cubs had through the playoffs and to a World Series title this year.  Obviously a seven-game series, that was historic and exciting, and this is a young team that's equipped to make many future visits to the White House I think.

So the President is really looking forward to it.  I'm not aware that we've encountered any unexpected challenge in trying to schedule this visit.  In fact, this visit is actually being scheduled earlier than normal.  For example, the Royals obviously won in November of 2015 and they didn't visit the White House until July of the next year.  The Cubs are coming just a couple of months after securing their World Series title, and I think that's an indication that we've been able to work effectively with the front office of the Chicago Cubs to schedule a visit.  And I know President Obama and other members of the White House staff are really looking forward to it.

Jared.

Q    Josh, not in the context of last week's briefing, but in the context of a news story over the last 24 hours, have you seen -- has the President seen the reports from CNN, from BuzzFeed, from Mother Jones about this allegation about compromising information for the President-elect?

MR. EARNEST:  The President was quite busy last evening while this news broke, but I'm sure -- so he was not reading it in real time as this information was being reported.  But the President is certainly aware of the news reports and has read many of them.

Q    What is -- is there any reaction that the President has?  Have you spoken to him since that?  I know that NBC News got a chance to ask him a little bit about this on the plane, but have you talked to him about any of these details, any reaction to what's included in this?  Again, not about what may or may not have been included last week in the confidential briefing, but in this as a news story?

MR. EARNEST:  I don't have a specific presidential reaction to share with you.  I know the President did have an opportunity to talk to Lester Holt of NBC about this briefly last evening before the speech.  But I don't have anything to add to it beyond what the President said.

Q    In the press conference today, the President-elect said that because the presidency cannot have conflicts of interest in law, he basically -- his argument was conflating it and saying that therefore there is no ability for the presidency to have a conflict of interest.  That's not true, is it?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, I'm no government ethics expert, but that seems like a tough case to make even to somebody who is not steeped in those kinds of details.

Q    And one last one.  Again, this is not trying to get you to confirm or deny anything from the confidential briefing last week, but the President, on the campaign trail leading up to Election Day, expressed a lot of certitude about what the American people would choose on November 8th.  Was that based on his impression of Donald Trump, the prima facie case that Trump was making to the people?  Or was there something that he knew that either in the back of his mind or in the forefront of his mind said this is just -- this is something that -- can you give us a little bit more about that certitude and why it existed?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I think the President was expressing exactly the same kind of certitude that most of you thought -- not because I'm suggesting that you're biased in any way, but based on your own analysis of the political environment.  Just about every public poll indicated that Secretary Clinton was likely to win.  Many of those public polls indicated that she was likely to win rather handily.  But that's not the way it turned out.

So the President was disappointed by that outcome.  He was surprised by the outcome.  But the American people spoke, and he set aside his own political differences with the incoming President to ensure a smooth and effective transition, and he's asked his team to do the same thing.  And the President and his team have delivered on that promise.

Q    Was classified information about Donald Trump a factor in President Obama's confidence in what he thought was going to happen?

MR. EARNEST:  No, I think the President's confidence about what he thought and hoped would happen in the election was driven by a variety of factors.  Many of them are his own experience campaigning on the campaign trail, the kind of projections about voter turnout that were coming in from sources around the country.  Obviously, public polling and private polling influenced his judgment.  I think the President was pleased to see the degree to which his message was resonating on the campaign trail.  I think the President believed that Secretary Clinton would have been an excellent President, and that certainly contributed to some of the confidence that he felt.  But like most Americans, he was surprised by the outcome.

Jean.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  On North Korea, North Korea continues to threaten with the nuclear and ICBM to South Korea and the United States.  Did President Obama feel he did enough to resolve North Korean nuclear issues while he was President?

MR. EARNEST:  Jean, obviously the situation is not resolved, but President Obama does believe that because of the decisions that he made, the United States is able to protect ourselves from the threat that is emanating from North Korea.  The United States is able to protect our allies from the threat that emanates from North Korea.  And the United States has succeeded in mobilizing the international community to further pressure and isolate the North Korean regime to persuade them to change course.

With regard to the defense of the United States, there's been a significant increase in the military assets that have been deployed to the Asia Pacific, including naval assets with anti-ballistic missile capabilities, to protect the United States.  That includes advanced radar systems in places like Guam and Japan.  The United States is working closely with the South Korean government to deploy a THAAD battery, another anti-missile battery on South Korean soil, to better protect our South Korean allies.

There are a number of naval assets, ships in the Pacific Ocean that are bolstering the defense of the United States, and there's also military equipment that's been deployed to Alaska to also protect the United States.  So there have been significant movements of military equipment to protect the U.S.  And the President believed that that was prudent given the threat that emanates from North Korea.

We've obviously been steadfast in our support of both Japan and South Korea as they counter this threat.  Those are our allies that are most directly in harm's way.  And our commitment to their national security is resolute, and hopefully that will be the case in the incoming administration.  There's a strong reason to believe that it will, but ultimately the incoming President will have to make those kinds of decisions.

And we're pleased that we have succeeded at the end of last year in passing through the United Nations Security Council the toughest-ever sanctions on North Korea.  And that required building the diplomatic support not just of our allies in Europe, but also the support of countries like Russia and China, with whom we have some profound differences of agreement -- or differences of opinion in other areas, but with regard to North Korea, we've been able to find common ground in a way that has applied additional pressure and further isolated the North Korean government.

Q    So North Korea's intent is still valid?

MR. EARNEST:  Our view with regard to North Korea is that they should refrain from the kinds of destabilizing activities that frequently rattle nerves not just in the region but around the world.  We believe that North Korea needs to come into compliance with international obligations that relate to their nuclear program because we would like to see the Korean Peninsula be denuclearized.  And what we have indicated to North Korea is if they're prepared to take those steps, the international community is prepared to work with them to implement those steps and allow North Korea to begin the process of reentering the global community.

Q    One more.  Recently, North Korean Kim Jong-un proclaimed North Korea will soon launch ICBM anytime, anywhere.  Is the United States ready to shoot down ICBM for defense?

MR. EARNEST:  As the Secretary of Defense said over the weekend, the United States has the capability to protect the United States and our allies from the threat that emanates from North Korea, including the capability to shoot down those missiles that could pose a threat to the United States or our allies.

Andrew.

Q    Josh, you’ve worked in the White House for a relatively long time now. Do you think it's a good strategy for an administration to pick fights on kind of multiple fronts with the media, with intelligence agencies, with senators within their own party?  Would that be something you would advocate?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  Well, it sounds like a bit of a leading question.  (Laughter.)  But that's okay.  Listen, I think what I can tell you is President Obama has pursued a different approach. The President benefitted from a highly effective working relationship with the intelligence community.  He was able to obtain timely, relevant and accurate information from the experts in the U.S. intelligence community that aided him and his team greatly as they made important decisions to protect the United States and our interests around the world.

With regard to Congress, the administration worked to try to find common ground with Democrats and Republicans.  It doesn’t mean that the administration got along with Democrats and Republicans at every turn.  There are some cases where you're going to have differences of opinion.  And I would anticipate that the incoming administration will find the same thing with regard to their relationships both with Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill.

With regard to the media, there's been a lot of attention on this in the last couple of months.  Our approach has been to engage with all of you.  The President believes strongly that an independent, unbiased, professional media is critical to the success of our democracy.  And one way we can invest in your efforts to hold people in power accountable is to come out here and answer questions, and to do so on camera, on the record, just about every single day.  And President Obama does that himself occasionally.  And it's good for the country and it's good for our democracy.

It means that all of you have an important role to play.  It certainly doesn’t mean that we've always gotten along.  But it does mean we've been able to function effectively to ensure that our differences of opinion don’t affect your ability to do your job.  It doesn’t affect the ability of the White House to do its job or to effectively engage with the White House Press Corps that is tasked with informing the American people about what's happening around here.

Q    Were there any times during this administration where you've worried that that kind of bunker mentality was setting in and that was preventing you from getting --

MR. EARNEST:  Well, that's always a risk to guard against.  And this is the example that I've most often cited with regard to our relationship with the media.  Our democracy is constructed such that the free and independent media is in place to hold people in power accountable.  And that means it's your responsibility as an independent journalist to demand greater access, to demand greater transparency, to demand a better, more effective, more fulsome explanation of what the President is thinking about, what the President is doing and why he's doing it.  And that informs your coverage, and that certainly informs your analysis of what exactly is happening.

Now, there are certainly times -- many times -- where officials in the White House -- sometimes the President, sometimes members of his senior staff, sometimes me -- aren’t happy with the way that that information is being portrayed in your reporting or in your analysis.  But the goal that I have set is not to suggest that you have a responsibility to write stories that make the White House look good.  That's not your job.  Your job is to call it as you see it and to provide as much insight as possible about what exactly is happening here at the White House.

And if we're doing a good job, more often than not the President will at least look like he's got the right priorities, based on your readers.  But really what we want is we want journalists to use their skills as storytellers, as writers, as journalists to describe to the American people what's happening. And sometimes that's going to make the President look good, and sometimes it's probably not.

But when we're dissatisfied or unhappy with the way that some of the coverage is going, there is a temptation to retreat to the bunker and to say, the heck with those guys, to heck with their stories, to heck with what they think, let's just go and do what we think is right.  That kind of conviction is admirable, but it's unwise to write off such a critically important element of our democracy.  And so that's why I've viewed it as my role to make sure that when tensions do flare up -- I should say, when tensions get a little higher than usual, that it's important for me to make the case to my colleagues not retreat into the bunker, and to continue to engage.  Occasionally, I have to make that case to my boss, too.

But I also have a responsibility that when you guys get frustrated with us, to engage with you to make sure that that frustration doesn’t interfere with your ability to do your job so you don’t start writing us off and say, I'm just not going to call those guys, I'm just going write what I want -- to heck with what those guys think.  And that's the kind of relationship that I've tried to facilitate here.  I think every press secretary has their own approach, and surely my successor is going to have his own approach.  But that's the approach that we have taken.  And I think the President has been very well served by it, in part because so many people who are in here are so dedicated and experienced and determined to play that important role in our democracy, but also because our administration has a pretty powerful case to make about the virtue of the decisions that we’ve been making here.

The results speak for themselves, in large part.  So that’s obviously going to make things -- when you have a good story to tell, it’s going to make the storyteller look better than if you don’t have many results to show for your performance.

And so that’s the approach that we have taken.  And I don’t know if that will be relevant or resonate with the incoming administration, but like I said, I believe that that has served the President well, and I also believe that it’s served the country well.

Mark.

Q    Josh, when you said a moment ago that President Obama feels the opportunity for criticizing President-elect Trump expired on Election Day, do you feel that President-elect Trump is reciprocating when he is critical of the President’s policies today, again saying that the administration created ISIS; that Obamacare is a complete and total disaster; that Russia would have more respect for the United States once President-elect Trump is in office?

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah, I noticed some of those comments as well.  I’ll let the President-elect and his team explain why he made those statements and why he wanted to continue to make the arguments in that way, despite the fact that those arguments don’t withstand much scrutiny and there aren’t too many facts that are mobilized to support those kinds of arguments.

And to the extent that there’s interest in a debate, this administration feels quite proud of the progress that we’ve been able to make, and the facts of that progress strongly bolster our case and don’t do much to substantiate the case that’s made by our critics.

Q    On another issue, can you tell us what kind of packing up is underway in the West Wing?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I can tell you is that the packing has begun.  You can tell which members of the White House staff are planners because they have made more progress in preparing for their departure nine days from now.  There are those of us who will probably be spending some time here over the three-day weekend trying to do that work.

The other thing that has begun happening is that members of the White House staff have started rolling off, because obviously the transfer of power has to occur just in a matter of hours so there’s has been a staggered roll-off of White House staff that is starting to accelerate.  And so the line at the mess is a little bit shorter around lunchtime, and --

Q    A lot of empty seats in here, too.

MR. EARNEST:  There’s more empty seats in here too, yeah.  I think you guys are stretched thin as you are covering not just a President of the United States but also a President-elect as well.

Q    Oh, what else is the President doing today?  There’s not much on the schedule that you gave us.

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah, relatively quiet day today.  The President has got a couple meetings with staff this afternoon, but obviously given the very busy day that he had yesterday and the very late return back here to the White House, the President’s day is, publicly, pretty quiet.

Athena.

Q    Thanks, Josh.  Just a couple with possible follows.  On this issue of the unconfirmed allegations regarding the President-elect and his team and Russia that CNN and other organizations have reported on -- I'm not asking you about those allegations themselves or what was in them, but the President talked last night about the selective sorting of facts, and he’s talked a lot over the past many months about the siloing of news sources, people living in their own bubbles.  And then we have this whole idea of fake news -- the definition of which there doesn’t seem to be a lot of agreement on because lots of people are using that term as they see fit.

So the question is, does the White House feel that BuzzFeed, in publishing these unconfirmed allegations in full, acted appropriately, or did they make it potentially harder for the truth to come out?  And going with that, does Trump and his team have a point that these allegations are just another way to delegitimize him?

MR. EARNEST:  With regard to the delegitimizing thing, I think that’s the easiest one, so let me just knock that one out of the way, which is I think that what should be evidence to anybody who’s even been paying a little bit of attention is that since the election outcome was announced, not just late on the night of November 8th but early in the morning of November 9th, this administration, led by this President, has been dedicated to ensuring a smooth and effective transition with the incoming administration.  And with regard to the legitimacy of the election, I think that actions speak much louder than words, and I think that there’s just no question about that.

With regard to the decision that was made by your news organization, BuzzFeed -- who I think were obviously all making their own independent decisions -- and doing separately and different things, what I’m just suggesting is, is that your news organization was the first news organization to report on this.  That obviously was -- I don’t have any insight into what sort of editorial decision-making process was implemented to reach that conclusion, but I’m confident that there was one.  I assume there was a similar process at BuzzFeed that reached a different conclusion, as you point out.

But I guess this is my point:  Independent editorial decisions made by independent news organizations should be made independent of government influence.

Over the last eight years, we've had a variety of circumstances where the administration has expressed some frustration with some of the editorial decisions that were made by your news organizations.  We've expressed those concerns sometimes -- not sometimes; frequently.  But at each stage, in every conversation that I've ever been a part of about an editorial decision, we have acknowledged at the beginning, middle and end of that conversation that whatever decision is made is one that you all will make.  And that reflects the respect this administration has for the constitutional rights of independent media organizations.

But there’s another element of this that I think warrants mentioning here, which is, obviously, the President-elect and his team are suggesting that the accusations that are being made are totally unfounded, that there’s no basis for them.  This President has been in a situation in which he has been criticized in an utterly false, baseless way.  And I'm, of course, referring to the President’s birthplace.  There were a wide variety of the President’s critics who were suggesting and propagating conspiracy theories that somehow the President wasn’t born in the United States, but that he was the object of some grand conspiracy.

It's still hard to put together even now as you think about it.  But they made those accusations even though the administration had already released the birth certificate, and even though there was contemporaneous news reporting announcing his birth in Hawaii.  So the conspiracy theories were propagated even in the face of significant, overwhelming and convincing evidence.  But yet, those conspiracy theories continued.  And many of those conspiracy theories were centered on the long-form version of the President’s birth certificate.

So, when faced with that situation, President Obama made a decision.  He dispatched an attorney to fly all the way to Hawaii and go to the state archives and engage in a process of obtaining a document that is rarely made public that is not stored in a way that makes it readily accessible to the public.  The President’s legal team engaged in a process that typically takes weeks and months to obtain that document.  And once it was obtained, we released it.  In this very room.  Handed it out, on paper, to all of you, so that all of you could look at that piece of paper and verify for yourself, to be convinced that the charges that were lobbed against the President were false.

I point all of this out -- this well-trod path of history -- to just underscore that the incoming administration has chosen a different approach.  They’ve not been transparent.  Many of the questions that have been raised have been about potential financial entanglements of the President-elect, his family and his business in Russia.  There’s ample evidence that they could marshal to make public to refute those claims -- those accusations that they say are baseless, but they’ve refused to do so.

That kind of secrecy only serves to sow public doubt.  You’ll recall during the campaign, as the President-elect was refusing to release his tax returns, people were saying, what’s he hiding?  People are asking that question again.  And again, all of the available evidence, to the extent that there is any, doesn’t actually substantiate their argument that the claims are baseless, because I know at least one member of the Trump family was quoted on the record in the not too distant past saying that the family and the Trump organization had extensive financial ties to Russia.

So, ultimately, I think that the incoming administration is going to have to make some decisions about what approach they want to take.  And again, this is an imperfect analogy -- I'll just stipulate that at the top -- but the difference in approach that we have taken has been starkly different.  We expressed great frustration about critics repeating that information even though there was plenty of publicly available evidence to indicate that it was false.  We expressed some deep frustration to you and your news organizations about the way that you were handling those accusations.  But ultimately, what we sought to do was to uncover and release information to substantiate our case.

And the incoming President has pursued a different approach -- not just by trying to meet the bare standard of transparency, but to fall way short of it, and to refuse to meet that same standard that many previous Presidents have met by releasing tax returns.

So, with regard to the tactics and strategy that they’re employing to deal with this situation, it's quite different than the one that this administration has implemented.  And given the President’s election and reelection, even as the storm of these charges was swirling, I think that would be a pretty good validation of the approach that we have chosen, setting aside the intrinsic benefit to the American people of the incoming administration living up to standard of transparency that was set by previous Presidents.

Q    You raised a lot of points, so I'll combine my follow with the only other question I have, which is --

MR. EARNEST:  I appreciate you indulging me.

Q    Just to be clear, I want to make it clear, the administration doesn’t have a viewpoint or any stance on whether or not it is helpful to the pursuit of the truth for an organization to publish unsubstantiated allegations.  I just want to make sure that I know what --

MR. EARNEST:  On principle, the administration deeply respects and will protect the right of independent news organizations to make their own editorial decisions.  It doesn’t mean that we agree with all of them.  There are many situations in which we have not.  But we respect and will stipulate from the beginning that independent news organizations should make editorial decisions independent of any sort of government interference.

Q    That's sounds different from -- for months, though, when publications were reporting on the leaks during the last months of the campaign, you guys were saying from the podium shouldn’t these news organizations not be doing that.  So are you --

MR. EARNEST:  Actually, I didn’t.  I walked this fine line of saying -- when I was asked about John Podesta’s emails, for example -- these were emails that were leaked by DCLeaks, which we knew before the election was actually consistent with the kinds of efforts that were undertaken by Russia to sow doubt about our democracy.  What I said at every turn was to stipulate that those materials were stolen.  I said that independent news organizations are going to have to make their own editorial decisions about whether or not to publish them, or how to describe them publicly.

And in most situations, given the fact that they were stolen, I declined to respond -- or to react to them.  There were a couple of situations in which I did.  But at each turn I stipulated that while the material was stolen -- and I think that does indicate, potentially, difference of opinion with the editorial judgement that was being exercised by news organizations.  I, at every turn, stipulated that it was their decision to make.

And look, I think news organizations who are looking back at this episode have already concluded and expressed some remorse about the way they handled it.  It was The New York Times who described American news organizations, including the New York Times, as essentially weaponizing information that had been hacked and leaked by Russia with nefarious intent.  So I give them credit for actually engaging in that thought process and in acknowledging their own regret about it.  But ultimately, every independent news organization is going to have to draw their own conclusions about the best way to deal with situations like this.

With regard to the people who are facing these accusations though, they face some decisions too.  And what this administration, when faced with a similar circumstance -- our reaction was to try to provide as much information as possible to refute the claims.  The incoming administration has relied on secrecy, and I think rather than to refute the claims, it has continued to sow doubt in the minds of the public and apparently in the minds of some media organizations.

Q    And last question, related to all of this -- fine, the incoming administration may or may not choose to release this information, but my understanding is that Congress has the power to subpoena even the President -- the incoming President to release his tax returns.  If I have that right, does the White House feel that that’s something that should be done?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m actually not aware of that congressional power.  But if it is a power that Congress has, ultimately members of Congress will have to decide for themselves how and whether to exercise it.

This gentleman right here.

Q    Hi.  So yesterday, in President Obama’s speech, one of the lines I saw frequently quoted was this idea of leaving the Facebook commenting section and going out and talking to people you disagree with.  Do you think that --

MR. EARNEST:  He said it a little bit more concisely than you did but -- (laughter) --

Q    Do you think that the President and this administration has effectively reached out to those who may not have agreed with this administration’s agenda, whether that’s in the public or on the Hill or elsewhere?

MR. EARNEST:  Yes, this administration has gone to great lengths to try to engage the American public.  Sometimes it’s been through the Internet, but oftentimes that’s been in person. President Obama himself has traveled to all 50 states.  There were times where we sought out locations where the President could go to communities that had not traditionally supported the President.

Off the top of my head, I can recall last summer, when President Obama traveled to Elkhart, Indiana -- a community that has enjoyed a dramatic recovery from the Great Recession.  Most analysts acknowledge that that recovery was due to the hard work and grit of the people of Elkhart, but that opportunity would not have been available to them without the tough policy decisions that President Obama made early in his presidency.

And yet, despite the benefits that have been enjoyed by that community as a result of the decisions made by President Obama, President Obama didn’t fare well in that community during his re-elect.  So that’s just one example of the President actually seeking out communities that don’t agree with him politically to go and try to make his case in person.

And I’ll say that I think where the President has acknowledged shortcomings on this score is with regard to the organizing that’s done by the Democratic Party.  And certainly in the context of the 2016 election, the President has made the argument that Democrats weren’t effective in going out and making the case to communities all across the country about how they had benefitted from the policies that Democrats have championed.

And the President believes that in order for Democrats to do better in future elections, we’re going to need to do a whole lot more of that.

Q    One last question.  We saw reports that Sasha wasn’t there last night because she had an exam today.  Any news on how that exam went or what class it was in?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have a readout of the youngest Obama’s performance in her exam today, but I suspect her parents concluded that her performance on the test would not have been enhanced by returning to the White House at 2:15 in the morning.

John Decker.

Q    Thanks a lot, Josh.  You watched the President-elect’s press conference today, you alluded to that --

MR. EARNEST:  I saw most of it.

Q    What do you make, I’m curious, of the format of the press conference today?  A lot different than what we’re used to in dealing with President Obama --

MR. EARNEST:  Including a cheering section, apparently.

Q    -- that we’ve had over the course of the past eight years.  What’s your view about how they conducted things today?

MR. EARNEST:  Listen, I think they're going to have an opportunity to set up the structure of these engagements in the way that they believe best serves the President.  And that certainly is a prerogative that they have.  I don't know if that means they're going to install one of those flashing applause signs in the White House Briefing Room.  (Laughter.)  But they can do that if they would like.

Look, what you've heard me say is that it is important for the people who are in positions of authority to be held accountable.  And I do think it was important for the President-elect, after a long delay, to make him available to the reporters who were covering him on a daily basis, even an hourly basis, and to answer their questions.  And that was important.  And I think the American people and our democracy benefits from him doing that.

Q    As you know, he famously uses Twitter to communicate to the public.  What advantages are there, in your view, of just having a regular old press conference and talking to the press corps that covers the President on a daily basis?

MR. EARNEST:  Well, obviously, that's a very different engagement.  When the President-elect is on Twitter he is putting forward into the public views and opinions that go virtually unchallenged.  At a news conference it’s different.  At a news conference, he’s responding to a question, he’ll give an answer, and in many cases is subjected to a follow-up, somebody pressing a little bit more to more directly answer the question, or to account for something that he’s said that may not be consistent with the facts.  And that kind of engagement is entirely different than just disseminating information on Twitter.

Q    So you would suggest more -- not that the Trump campaign or transition is listening to you at this point -- but you would suggest more of these over the course of his presidency?

MR. EARNEST:  What I can just say on principle is that I believe that those kinds of engagements in which people in authority are engaging with the reporters who cover them regularly, that's a good thing for our democracy.  There’s an important role for those reporters to play in terms of holding people in power accountable.  And it’s good to see people in authority, in positions of authority spending time answering their questions and being held accountable by them in a way that's public and in a way that everybody can see.

Q    Any possibility of the Clemson football team coming here to the White House?  (Laughter.)

MR. EARNEST:  There is a friend of mine who is a proud Clemson graduate who did have an opportunity to fly down to Tampa for the game, who emailed me very early yesterday morning -- presumably as he was boarding his flight back to D.C. -- to find out if that was a possibility.  I think it’s unlikely that we’ll be able to arrange a visit on that short a notice.

But obviously, I think Clemson fans have a reason to be real proud of their team, not just in terms of the way that their team performed on the field and beat an Alabama program that I think has -- even with the loss has probably achieved the status of a dynasty, but I also think they can be pretty proud of the way that the coaching staff and the players handled themselves in the aftermath of their victory.  And I think that was -- for their heroic performance in the field, during the game, I think it was their humility and sense of camaraderie that they expressed after the game that really struck me.

So, John Gizzi, I’ll give you the last one.

Q    Thank you, Josh.  You said earlier that you would not comment on Rex Tillerson’s hearings, that you wouldn’t pass judgement and leave that up to the Senate in its capacity to advise and consent, correct?

MR. EARNEST:  Yeah, I’ll let the Senate decide.  Obviously, it’s the men and women of the Senate who have a responsibility to demand answers from the men and women that President-elect Trump has asked to serve in his Cabinet.  And ultimately, they will pass judgement on the qualifications of those individuals that have been put forward by the President-elect.

Q    Now, two good friends and allies of the President, Senator Cory Booker and Congressman John Lewis, are both testifying against Senator Sessions as nominee to be Attorney General.  And does what you said about the Tillerson nomination apply to all Cabinet nominations?  Do you have a comment on that and on two close allies of the President breaking historical precedent to testify against a nominee?

MR. EARNEST:  Look, I would in no way suggest that the standard that I’ve set for the President or for me who have an institutional responsibility to ensure a smooth and effective transition somehow applies to members of the United States Congress.  They should make their voices heard, and they should do so consistent with their own judgement about that.

And I think that's exactly what Congressman Lewis and Senator Booker have done.  But President Obama obviously has institutional responsibilities that require him to focus on a transition and not focus on critiquing or criticizing the people that President-elect Trump has appointed to these important positions even if they are not at all the kind of people that President Obama would have appointed.

Q    And did Senator Booker or Congressman Lewis discuss their intention to testify with the President before they did?

MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware that they spoke to the President about it.  But even if they did, I’m not sure that it matters.

Thanks, everybody.  We’ll see you tomorrow.

END
2:27 P.M. EST
